1000|1987\01\04|CANDLELIGHT CONCERTS PLANNED TO FILL THE POST-HOLIDAY LULL|IT usually takes two or three weeks before the concert season gets rolling again after the holidays, but this year, the director of music at the First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich, Richard Vogt, has decided to do something to change that.|IT usually takes two or three weeks before the concert season gets rolling again after the holidays, but this year, the director of music at the First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich, Richard Vogt, has decided to do something to change that. IT usually takes two or three weeks before the concert season gets rolling again after the holidays, but this year, the director of music at the First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich, Richard Vogt, has decided to do something to change that. ''It's something of a dull doldrums time,'' Mr. Vogt said, ''so we've decided to brighten things up with a series of free one-hour candlelight concerts. It'll be a very friendly sort of ambiance, with the audience sitting around tables, enjoying tea and cookies, putting a donation in the basket, if they wish to, and enjoying a wide variety of music.'' The first of the programs, by the soprano Elizabeth Braden, with the pianist John Keene, is to be today at 4 P.M., with seven more recitals to come at that same hour on subsequent Sundays through March 1, when the Metropolitan Opera's Brigitte Fassbaender sings Schubert's ''Winterreise.'' Other highlights of the series are to be appearances by the New York Russian Chorus (Jan. 18), the young baritone Dale Duesing (Feb. 1) the duo-pianists Cameron Grant and James Winn (Feb. 22). Meanwhile, back-to-back concerts at 5 and 7:30 P.M. Saturday celebrate Mr. Vogt's 20th anniversary at First Congregational, with the maestro at the helm of the church chorus and orchestra and an impressive roster of guest artists including Dave Brubeck, Clamma Dale, Elaine Bonazzi and John Aler. Excerpts from Mr. Brubeck's ''Fiesta de la Posada'' are to be featured, along with music of Offenbach, Gershwin, Vaughan Williams, Grainger and Rossini. Tickets are free but limited and should be reserved in advance by calling 637-1791. Another reason to go back to church today is provided by South Congregational-First Baptist in New Britain, where the ambitious music series is to resume at 4 P.M. with Gian-Carlo Menotti's ''Amahl and the Night Visitors.'' Originally composed for television, this warm-hearted Christmas story is among the best-loved operas ever written in English, and today's fully staged production by Connecticut Opera Express stars Tambra King in the title role and Margaret Kelly as the mother, with John David Scott conducting. Here again there is no formal admission charge, although donations are welcomed. Call 223-3691. Although Mr. Menotti is best known for his operas and other stage pieces, his instrumental writings include major concertos for violin, piano and cello, and last year, the New York Philharmonic premiered his Concerto for Doublebass and Orchestra with the noted virtuoso James VanDemark as soloist. When the Fairfield Chamber Orchestra plays its annual benefit concert 9 P.M. Saturday at the Westport Arts Center, Mr. VanDemark is to once again be in the solo spotlight, this time giving the first Connecticut performance of the Bass Concerto. Also on the program are Wagner's ''Siegfried Idyll'' and the Second Brandenburg Concerto of Bach, all with Thomas Crawford on the podium (225-1160). The first of Connecticut's full-size orchestras to return to the stage in 1987 is to be the Hartford Symphony with paired programs at Bushnell Hall Friday and Saturday evenings at 8, followed by a touring ''community concert'' stop in Avon at 2 P.M. Jan. 11. The Bushnell programs have been dubbed ''Richard Hayman's New Year's Party'' since the popular maestro has listed such bubbly songs as ''The Night They Invented Champagne,'' and promises to ''Strike Up the Band'' from ''South Pacific'' to ''La Cage aux Folles.'' There will also be a ''Name That Tune'' contest with prizes (236-6101). For the concert on Jan. 11 at Avon High School, the Hartford Symphony's music director, Michael Lankester, will be back in charge, not only conducting Copland's ''Fanfare for the Common Man'' and the Tchaikovsky Fifth Symphony, but giving an informal pre-concert talk about the works, and then presiding at a post-concert reception for the audience and the performers. Coupons exchangeable for free tickets to later symphony performances at the Bushnell are to be given away (673-0876). Returning to events in a lighter vein, Buffy Sainte-Marie, once in the vanguard of the contemporary folk movement, although in recent years more visible as a member of the ''Sesame Street'' family, makes one of her all-too-rare solo appearances 8 P.M. Tuesday at Stamford's Palace Theater of the Arts. We find P. D. Q. Bach at the Palace on Wednesday at that same hour, and Prof. Peter Schickele will be perpetrating an entire ''Evening of Musical Madness,'' inflicting upon us such items as P. D. Q.'s ''Variations on an Unusually Simple-Minded Theme'' and a suite from ''The Civilian Barber.'' Things return to normal as the weekend approaches and the Palace welcomes two visiting ensembles from Vienna: Thursday evening at 8, the Johann Strauss Orchestra plays ''The Blue Danube'' and others of its namesake's greatest hits (while the audience celebrates with complimentary champagne); Friday at 8 P.M., it is the eagerly awaited return of the Vienna Choir Boys, an ensemble established by royal decree in 1498. Also coming to the Palace is a Saturday 8 P.M. performance of ''Patience,'' with John Reed, formerly of of Britain's D'Oyly Carte Opera Company joining New York's thriving Gilbert and Sullivan Players. This is a fully staged production conducted by Albert Bergeret. The box office number for ''Patience''tickets is 359-0009; the other Palace programs are sponsored by the Stamford Center for the Arts, so call 324-6781 for reservations. Finally, folk fans will cheer the return in 1987 of weekly concerts organized by the Sounding Board, and held, coffeehouse style, at First Church of Christ Congregational, in West Hartford. The Eight Mile River Band gets things off to a rollicking bluegrass start Saturday; Sparky Rucker brings his blues and gospel songs in on Jan. 17, and Lorraine Lee, a fine singer and superb dulcimer player, appears on Jan. 24. All evening programs begin at 8 (telephone reservations will be held only until 7:50 P.M.), and you can get more information by calling 563-3263. MUSIC
