1001|1987\01\04|LONG ISLAND JOURNAL|PARKING PATROL ''WHY are you taking a picture of my car?''|PARKING PATROL ''WHY are you taking a picture of my car?'' PARKING PATROL ''WHY are you taking a picture of my car?'' Connie Galetsellis of Greenlawn said to the bespectacled woman in a trenchcoat who was busy adjusting her Polaroid camera. ''You are parked illegally,'' Florence S. of East Northport replied as she took the photo while leaning on a walking cane decorated in red and white bunting for the holidays. Miss S. solemnly pointed to the handicapped-parking sign in front of Mrs. Galetsellis's car, which was parked in the Huntington Square Mall lot in East Northport. ''But I was only here for a minute,'' Mrs. Galetsellis said. ''That's what they all say,'' Miss S. said as she wrote up her report. Florence S. is tough. The parking enforcer, who asked that her last name not be used, is herself qualifed for handicapped parking because of a bad hip and neuromuscular disease. But she called that an extra incentive to go out on patrol for the Town of Huntington, looking for cars illegally parked in spaces reserved for the handicapped. Miss S. is one of 18 volunteers who were recently given instant cameras by Huntington to take photos of illegally parked cars, according to Jane Michaels Katzberg, Huntington's director of handicapped services. Violators identified from license plates are subject to a fine of $35. If the fine is not paid in 10 days it goes up to $50. Since the cameras were issued, 60 pictures of illegally parked cars have been turned in, Mrs. Katzberg said. Huntington's handicapped-parking enforcement program has been in effect for several years, Mrs. Katzberg said, but recently the town decided to beef up its campaign by purchasing new cameras and adding more volunteers. One of the old-time volunteers is Florence S., who said she has been taking pictures of illegally parked cars since 1982. ''I average 300 to 400 a year,'' she said, and she's heard all the excuses. Handicapped-parking permits must be displayed in the front windows of cars. But ''you get the person who says, 'I had it in the glove compartment,' '' she said. ''I tell them I don't have X-ray vision.'' COUNSELING PET OWNERS ''FEELINGS, nothing more than feelings.'' As the recorded music wafted through the small room, Ina Cavallaro reached for another tissue. ''I was afraid I wouldn't be able to stand how much I'd miss Moochie,'' she said to Alice Denninger, the pet grief counselor for the Bide-a-Wee Home in Wantagh. ''He was so beautiful - he was the best friend I ever had.'' ''It's all right to cry,'' Mrs. Denninger told Miss Cavallaro. ''Tears are therapeutic.'' ''Then I'm getting a lot of therapy,'' Miss Cavallaro said as she wiped her eyes. The music-therapy session was going well. Although it had been less than 48 hours since Miss Cavallaro, of Rosedale, Queens, had put to sleep her ''best friend,'' an 11-year-old cat named Moochie, she was finding it easier to talk about him and to at least consider saying what she called the ''final goodbye.'' ''Words aren't enough,'' Mrs. Denninger said later in explaining why she has produced the elaborate taped music ''say goodbye'' therapy sessions. ''Music enters into you,'' she said. Mrs. Denninger, of Elmont, has been a full-time grief counselor - or as she prefers to put it, ''a support-care counselor'' - for Bide-a-Wee for one year. She is on call seven days a week, she said, helping pet owners learn to cope with the deaths of their beloved cats, dogs and even horses. She is one of only a handful of counselors for animal lovers in the New York metropolitan area and, she said, the only such full-time counselor on Long Island. Besides meeting with mourning pet owners or talking with them by phone, she has often accompanied them to the veterinarian where the animals have been ''put down,'' she said. She's even served as a ''surrograte parent,'' staying with the pet as it is put to sleep, when the owner can't be present. ''It's human to grieve,'' said Mrs. Denninger, whose background is in spiritual counseling and crisis intervention. ''Just because we grieve for animals, that is nothing to laugh at. All life is precious.'' Last summer, Bide-a-Wee hired its second grief counselor, Anthony Aromando of East Hampton. Mr. Aromando, who works out of Bide-a-Wee's Westhampton animal center, counsels part time. He makes his living as an artist, he said. Since no text yet has been written on how to console a grieving pet owner, his style differs from Mrs. Denninger's. ''My system is more reality-oriented,'' he said. ''I just ask them what happened, and in the process of telling me they just cry and cry.'' Mrs. Denninger appears to have a more elaborate approach. She asks clients who come in person to bring pictures of their pets, ''so that I can get to know them,'' she said. For the goodbye session, ''I ask them to bring some special belonging of their pet - usually it's a toy or a leash.'' At a recent session, one of her clients, Marilyn Greer of Valley Stream, displayed a color photo of J.B., her 9-year-old female Great Dane, who died several months ago. ''I still miss her,'' Ms. Greer said. ''A lot of people thought I was weird to grieve so for a pet, but she was part of the family.'' ''They are our children,'' added Helen Mitchell of Glendale, Queens, referring to her dead cat, Boris; Ms. Greer's J.B., Miss Cavallaro's Moochie, and Boots, the late cat of Maryanne Chirco of Wantagh. ''Women seem to understand the need for this service more,'' Mr. Aromando said. Mrs. Denninger agreed. ''Men come at night,'' she said, ''and they usually say, 'My wife is having trouble getting over the loss of the dog.' Then when I meet the wife, she's fine. It was the man who was hurting.'' It appears that one reason people visit a pet grief counselor is that most of these pet owners had to make the decision to have their animals to sleep, and there's a tremendous sense of guilt, Mrs. Denniger said. But, she added, there is also some stigma attached to mourning for a pet. ''You don't sit shiva for an animal or get three days off from work so you can grieve for your pet. But the feelings are the same - they're just as intense.'' She had imparted this philosophy to Miss Cavallaro earlier. ''No human being could do for you what Moochie did for you,'' Mrs. Denninger told her. ''Don't let anyone tell you it's only an animal.'' AWARDS FOR SAFETY THE records have ''a lot to do with circumstances,'' cautioned Richard Newhouse, the manager of traffic safety services for the Automobile club of New York, part of the American Automobile Association (A.A.A.). ''If the community doesn't have much commercial traffic, well, that's a factor,'' he added. With that qualifier, here's the list of some Long Island communities that recently were cited by the A.A.A. for having exemplary traffic safety records. * Kings Point: 48 years without a pedestrian death from a traffic accident, and no pedestrian injuries in 1985. * Bayville: No pedestrian deaths for 22 years, and no pedestrian injuries in 1985. * Lloyd Harbor: 16 years of no pedestrian deaths, and no pedestrian injuries in 1985. * Babylon: No pedestrian death for 10 years, and pedestrian injuries reduced by 70 percent in 1985. * Hempstead: An award for its school traffic safety program. * Long Beach: Cited for its achievements in traffic engineering. * Rockville Centre: Praised for its effective coordination of safety programs. Others receiving credit for continuing their long records of no pedestrian deaths were Kensington, 54 years, and Southampton, 40 years. ''We give out these awards to encourage communities to prevent pedestrian injuries,'' Mr. Newhouse said. Each year that a community has no pedestrian deaths it gets a plaque, he said. By now, he said, there are quite a few A.A.A. plaques hanging on the walls of Long Island village halls.
