1002|1987\01\04|IN SHORT: FICTION|PIAZZA CARIGNANO. By Alain Elkann. Translated by William Weaver. (Atlantic Monthly, $16.95.)|PIAZZA CARIGNANO. By Alain Elkann. Translated by William Weaver. (Atlantic Monthly, $16.95.) PIAZZA CARIGNANO. By Alain Elkann. Translated by William Weaver. (Atlantic Monthly, $16.95.) On the Piazza Carignano in Turin, Italy, a strange love affair and even stranger novel work out their intertwined destinies. It is there that Alberto Claudio, the narrator, a rootless, mildly dissolute writer, takes up with Thusis, a mildly dissolute student of ballet. The relationship assumes historical significance with the discovery of a 50-year-old diary written by Tullio Treves, the narrator's uncle. In the first of many eerie coincidences, Treves, a committed Fascist and a Jew, turns out to have been romantically involved for years with Thusis' great-aunt. The two modern lovers attempt to reconstruct the lives of their shadowy predecessors. Treves proves an enigma, whose devotion to Fascism may have been inspired by noble motives or was perhaps the distorted expression of his estheticism and homosexual leanings. The narrator resolves to make this mysterious figure the protagonist of his new novel, whereupon Alain Elkann begins to indulge in some narrative hocus-pocus. Alberto Claudio picks up Treves's diary where it breaks off in 1944 and simply continues it himself, raising the question of fictional authenticity: which is the ''real'' diary? The author goes so far as to have Alberto and Thusis argue over how the novel should end, and a postscript announces that all the characters were given new names in Alberto Claudio's novel. None of this is terribly original, although the novel's brittle decadence is convincingly rendered by William Weaver's translation. As though to mock the author's experimental pretensions, it is Treves who remains in the memory, a man whose contradictions and philosophical musings carry just enough weight to make him a plausible center in this tantalizing but unresolved novel.
