1004|1987\01\04|IN SHORT: NONFICTION|EUROPE'S MYTHS OF ORIENT. By Rana Kabbani. (Indiana University, $19.50.)|EUROPE'S MYTHS OF ORIENT. By Rana Kabbani. (Indiana University, $19.50.) EUROPE'S MYTHS OF ORIENT. By Rana Kabbani. (Indiana University, $19.50.) In much the same way their fellow Victorians swarmed over the world classifying new phyla of butterflies, gentlemen adventurers like T. E. Lawrence and Sir Richard Burton set out to catalogue ''scientifically'' the living habits of the Eastern Moslems. The poet and translator Rana Kabbani claims in this provocative and appropriately subversive book that their vision was fatally clouded. Even as they boasted of mingling with the Islamic natives, their ''research'' was primarily of the compare-and-contrast variety - holding up their own civility and mental superiority to that of their subjects. The ultimate fruit of their travels, says Ms. Rabbani, was to reaffirm their own Western biases and values, as well as to perpetuate Europe's fabricated view of the East as a perverse carnival. Indeed, for many Westerners it served as a convenient theater in which to play out their own sexual kinks and secret obsessions. Burton, for example, translated ''The Thousand and One Nights,'' but apparently didn't find it salacious enough for his tastes, so he grafted on his own set of titillating footnotes. In writing about the East, he and other Europeans also revealed a virulent misogyny: Moslem women were regularly depicted as soulless (all the better to do with them as you willed - they didn't count), conniving and demonic (''every girl is a possible murderess''). Orientalist painters like Ingres and Delacroix bolstered these myths with their images of sexually insatiable harem girls and the ever-present, calculatedly ominous guard at the door - inevitably, a black man - the whipping boy for all the vices Europeans routinely practiced in the Orient but rarely owned up to at home. Ms. Kabbani suggests this trumped-up version of the godless East provided an apologia for Western sins with more devastating consequences - colonization and religious conversion.
