101|1987\01\01|FILM: NO-WIN SITUATION FOR HERO OF 'WISDOM'|John Wisdom, played by the possibly talented Emilio Estevez, who also wrote and directed the movie, is in a no-win situation. Though he's an intelligent, clean-cut, high-school-educated man of 23, he can't get a decent job because of his police record. As a teen-ager, Wisdom once got drunk with his friends and stole a car, a felony for which he was put on probation for four years.|John Wisdom, played by the possibly talented Emilio Estevez, who also wrote and directed the movie, is in a no-win situation. Though he's an intelligent, clean-cut, high-school-educated man of 23, he can't get a decent job because of his police record. As a teen-ager, Wisdom once got drunk with his friends and stole a car, a felony for which he was put on probation for four years. John Wisdom, played by the possibly talented Emilio Estevez, who also wrote and directed the movie, is in a no-win situation. Though he's an intelligent, clean-cut, high-school-educated man of 23, he can't get a decent job because of his police record. As a teen-ager, Wisdom once got drunk with his friends and stole a car, a felony for which he was put on probation for four years. Now his past haunts him. Being honest, he always acknowledges his record when he applies for white-collar positions and always is turned down. He's even dismissed from his job as a janitor because, says his boss, he's overqualified and lacks the love required for cleaning offices and lavatories. According to ''Wisdom,'' which opened yesterday at the Baronet and other theaters, society has left open only one route to the young man -crime, but what sort of crime? In what should be a funny sequence (but isn't), he considers, in turn, kidnapping, arson and murder, none of which really interest him. Like so many of his contemporaries, including beauty-contest winners, Wisdom is most interested in that vaguely generalized group termed people. Suddenly he has it. He'll hold up banks and, instead of taking money, he'll destroy mortgage records, thus freeing all those little guys on whom the lending institutions are foreclosing in the economic squeeze of the mid-80's. Most of ''Wisdom'' is played as cut-rate, populist comedy - Wisdom and his girlfriend, Karen (Demi Moore), being hailed by the public for their unorthodox, philanthropic exploits in robbing banks throughout the Southwest. Soon, however, things go wrong for the do-gooders, possibly because no one could think of a lighthearted way to get them out of their mess. Mr. Estevez is far more at ease as an actor than as a writer or director, though he's certainly as competent as most people making television movies. The problem is that ''Wisdom'' is aggressively boring, either because one can predict everything that's going to happen and exactly how it will look on the screen or because the concept of the film eventually seems even more confused than the title character. After devoting the second half of the movie to pretty images of himself and Miss Moore on their socially conscious joyride, Mr. Estevez, as Wisdom, is heard on the soundtrack saying something to the effect that the public was wrong to see the pair as romantic heroes. Under the circumstances, that thought comes a bit late. The performances aren't especially good or bad. Mr. Estevez and Miss Moore are photogenic, and Tom Skerritt and Veronica Cartwright, as Wisdom's worried, well-meaning parents, are no less bland than their roles. The R-rated movie is titled ''Wisdom,'' but by the end it's become ''Bonnie and Clunk.'' THE CAST - WISDOM, written and directed by Emilio Estevez; director of photography, Adam Greenberg; film editor, Michael Kahn; music by Danny Elfman; produced by Bernard Williams; released by the 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation. At Ziegfeld, Avenue of the Americas and 54th Street; Baronet, 59th Street at Third Avenue; 23d Street West Triplex, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues. Running time: 108 minutes. This film is rated R. Karen Simmons...Demi Moore; John Wisdom...Emilio Estevez; Lloyd Wisdom...Tom Skerritt; Samantha Wisdom...Veronica Cartwright; Williamson...William Allen Young; Cooper...Richard Minchenberg.
