1029|1987\01\04|Lauren and Susan Rappoport to Wed|Lauren Jill Rappoport, an associate at the New York law firm Botein, Hays & Sklar, and Steven Charles Witkoff, president of Fortune Equities Inc., a New York real-estate company, plan to be married in June. Ms. Rappoport's sister, Susan Dana Rappoport, an independent marketing consultant, and Sheldon J.|Lauren Jill Rappoport, an associate at the New York law firm Botein, Hays & Sklar, and Steven Charles Witkoff, president of Fortune Equities Inc., a New York real-estate company, plan to be married in June. Ms. Rappoport's sister, Susan Dana Rappoport, an independent marketing consultant, and Sheldon J. Lauren Jill Rappoport, an associate at the New York law firm Botein, Hays & Sklar, and Steven Charles Witkoff, president of Fortune Equities Inc., a New York real-estate company, plan to be married in June. Ms. Rappoport's sister, Susan Dana Rappoport, an independent marketing consultant, and Sheldon J. Ganis, a manager in the tax department at Oppenheim, Appel, Dixon & Company, an accounting firm in New York, plan to be married in September. The future brides are the daughters of Mr. and Mrs. Stanley D. Rappoport of New Rochelle, N.Y., who have announced their engagements. Lauren Rappoport graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a J.D. degree from the National Law Center of George Washington University. Her sister, an alumna of George Washington University, received an M.B.A. degree from New York University. Their father is a senior vice president of Integrated Resources Inc., a financial-services company in New York, and president of the NPI Management Corporation, a subsidiary. Their mother, Marcella D. Rappoport, is a travel consultant for Rich Worldwide Travel in Scarsdale, N.Y. Mr. Witkoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Martin Witkoff of Old Westbury and Westhampton Beach, L.I., graduated from Hofstra University and its school of law. His father is president of George Simonton Inc., a manufacturer of women's clothing in New York. His mother, Lois Witkoff, an interior designer, is a co-partner in Unique Hands in Manhattan and Old Westbury. Mr. Ganis, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Jesse J. Ganis of New Rochelle, graduated summa cum laude from Emory University and received an M.B.A. degree from N.Y.U. His father, who is retired, was a partner in Jacob Ganis & Sons, a New York lingerie manufacturer.
