1036|1987\01\04|Leslie L. Delafield Is Bride|Leslie Livingston Delafield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Walter B. Delafield of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Tinati, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Karim Tinati of Scarsdale, N.Y. The Rev. John Twiname performed the ceremony at St. Peter's Lutheran Church in New York.|Leslie Livingston Delafield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Walter B. Delafield of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Tinati, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Karim Tinati of Scarsdale, N.Y. The Rev. John Twiname performed the ceremony at St. Peter's Lutheran Church in New York. Leslie Livingston Delafield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Walter B. Delafield of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Tinati, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Karim Tinati of Scarsdale, N.Y. The Rev. John Twiname performed the ceremony at St. Peter's Lutheran Church in New York. Kristin Morris Delafield was her sister's maid of honor. John P. Rafferty was the best man. Mrs. Tinati, who graduated from the Hewitt School and Brown University, was until recently an account executive for Cunningham & Walsh, an advertising agency in New York. She was presented at the Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball and was a member of the Junior Assembly. Her father is a managing director of Executive Resources Ltd., an executive recruiting firm in New York. He is a former chairman of Delafield & Company and a former partner of Delafield & Delafield, both members of the New York Stock Exchange. Her mother, Jean Delafield, is a trustee of the Lenox Hill Hospital and the Museum of the City of New York. The bride is a granddaughter of Mrs. Edward C. Delafield of Baltimore and the late Mr. Delafield, who was a senior partner of Delafield & Delafield and president of the Bank of America in New York, which was merged into a predecessor to Citibank. Mr. Tinati, an account executive for Griffin Bacal Inc., an advertising agency in New York, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford. His father is president of K. T. Gannadi Inc., an import-export company in Secaucus, N.J.
