1038|1987\01\04|Gerald K. Kunkel And Miss Luchak To Wed in March|The engagement of Gay Heather Luchak to Gerald Kevin Kunkel has been announced by Dr. and Mrs. George Luchak of Princeton, N.J., parents of the bride-to-be. Her fiance is a son of Florence Kunkel of Nanuet, N.Y., and the late Howard J. Kunkel. The wedding is planned for March 14.  Miss Luchak, who is known as Heather, is a senior media executive for Burson-Marsteller, the public-relations agency in New York, and a freelance journalist.|The engagement of Gay Heather Luchak to Gerald Kevin Kunkel has been announced by Dr. and Mrs. George Luchak of Princeton, N.J., parents of the bride-to-be. Her fiance is a son of Florence Kunkel of Nanuet, N.Y., and the late Howard J. Kunkel. The wedding is planned for March 14.  Miss Luchak, who is known as Heather, is a senior media executive for Burson-Marsteller, the public-relations agency in New York, and a freelance journalist. The engagement of Gay Heather Luchak to Gerald Kevin Kunkel has been announced by Dr. and Mrs. George Luchak of Princeton, N.J., parents of the bride-to-be. Her fiance is a son of Florence Kunkel of Nanuet, N.Y., and the late Howard J. Kunkel. The wedding is planned for March 14.  Miss Luchak, who is known as Heather, is a senior media executive for Burson-Marsteller, the public-relations agency in New York, and a freelance journalist. She graduated from Denison University and studied at Franklin College in Lugano, Switzerland, during her junior year. Her father, professor emeritus of systems engineering at Princeton University, is chairman of the New Jersey Governor's Scientific Advisory Commission. Her mother, Elizabeth Luchak, is a nutrition consultant for the New Jersey Department of Education in Trenton. Mr. Kunkel, graphics editor and technical art director of PC Magazine, a Ziff-Davis publication in New York, is also a freelance designer and a consultant to the computer graphics industry. He attended St. John's University and the School of Visual Arts.
