1044|1987\01\04|A MARATHON OF SORTS|WELL, the holidays are over; their sumptuous color and sparkle are no more than the hassle of taking down lights and sweeping up tinsel; there's nothing to cope with now but the three gray months until spring. In many ways, it's a relief.|WELL, the holidays are over; their sumptuous color and sparkle are no more than the hassle of taking down lights and sweeping up tinsel; there's nothing to cope with now but the three gray months until spring. In many ways, it's a relief. WELL, the holidays are over; their sumptuous color and sparkle are no more than the hassle of taking down lights and sweeping up tinsel; there's nothing to cope with now but the three gray months until spring. In many ways, it's a relief. More and more often, during recent holiday seasons, I've been suffering attacks of Scroogism. In these moods, the days between mid-November and early January seem like the coal mines of the folk song ''Where the Dangers Are Doubled and the Pleasures Are Few.'' The pressures and problems and expense seem to mount year by year, while the ritual rewards have either lost their savor or gone by the boards altogether. Of course, one of the major rewards of childhood was quite simply the freedom from school. That was the bass line of the seasonal melodies. Gifts, especially as you outgrew toys per se, were always chancy; it was certain you'd have to assure the parents that you loved something for which you had no use at all; but you could be pretty sure that they'd get some things right. There was the year of the bicycle, and the year of the toboggan (fortunately, it snowed) and the year we all got ice skates and an ice rink, 10 feet in diameter. There were the holiday dinners -far richer food than anyone normally ate then - and the special church services that seemed more intense and uplifting than on normal Sundays, and the special music. But the core of it was, you got a week and a half free to enjoy it all. And it was not you who organized the celebration. You were simply the beneficiary, the gourmand for whom the feast was spread. It may be more blessed to give than to receive, but the former does wear you down. My holidays this year got off on the wrong foot when Lilco threatened to shut off the power. For some years now, I have been getting fulsome computerized compliments from the company about my prompt bill-paying. When I misplaced the November envelope and sent it in two weeks late, did the computer say to itself, ''Oh, her, she'll come through?'' Ha. Ten days after the bill was due, the computer shot out a nasty notification that I didn't deserve light and heat anymore. The day of the promised shut-off? Nov. 28. I opened this missive Nov. 26 - fortunately, before business hours were over. A pleasant woman assured me that the computer had been assuaged by my check and in any case they didn't just shut the power off without a second warning. In that case, say I, why say you will? But I didn't say it out loud; she wasn't responsible for the computer. I wished her a happy holiday and whipped out to stand in line in an overcrowded supermarket for the final ingredients for Thanksgiving dinner. I made a cake for dessert, and for the first time in years, I left out a key ingredient, the butter. I keep reading that there are people who produce multicourse dinners for fun, but I get fussed and fanatic about errors. It took a glass and a half of wine, and Tom's fervent compliments on the rest of the dinner, before I was in a properly thankful mood. Because so many family members live out West, Thanksgiving is the signal for me to start worrying about their presents - not buying them, necessarily, but worrying and making lists. Lists are one of my seasonal pleasures; sitting at the kitchen table with a cup of coffee and a new small notebook, I feel that things are under control after all. Another sure pleasure is the light-bulb kind of present. I had no idea what to give my 3-year-old niece, but inspiration struck when I drove past an antiques store and saw a child's rocking chair on the lawn. White-painted, graceful yet sturdy, light enough for her to carry around, it seemed perfect. I was sure I could find a box big enough. I did - it was discarded at the office - and lugged it home in pieces on the train. Twelve days before Christmas, I had that box loaded with the chair and the other gifts, wrapped in ribbon; stuffed crumpled newspapers in the gaps; strapped it with yards of super-sticky tape, and set off for the United Parcel center. The traffic was ferocious. I don't know what happens to people - well, I do: They've just spent an hour looking for a parking space and two hours in a jam-packed mall, and they're worrying about the bills. And they drive, depending on their level of frustration, with total absentmindedness or cut-throat desperation. I achieved the center with just two near-misses, and was whisked through the efficient U.P.S. intake system until I stood before the man with the scales, who said politely, even regretfully, ''We can't take this box. It's too big.'' I stopped at the dry cleaner on my way back home to cut the box down to the right size and to repack and restrap it. I told my sad story to a perfect stranger. ''I know,'' she said. ''I was so frazzled after Thanksgiving that my kids actually volunteered to help me get the house ready for Christmas. They offered, mind you.'' She smiled. Then the counter clerk said to her, ''Excuse me, Miss, I'm so sorry but your coat won't be ready until tomorrow.'' The smile disappeared. Now both of us had had our crammed timetables disrupted. In the end, Tom had to take the box back to U.P.S. - with the tips of the rockers pointing out - and returned to say they had accepted it but, because of the late rush, they couldn't get it to Oregon before Christmas. I just hope my niece loves the chair and doesn't outgrow it real soon. And then, to finish off this celebratory marathon, there is New Year's. This year Tom and I got to stay home; last Dec. 31 we were stuck at work in the city until 10:30 P.M. or so. To avoid the Times Square crowd, we walked down to Penn Station on Eighth Avenue. Even that early, it was a bacchanal, an orgy of noise. And in 10 blocks we saw two fights. In Penn Station, a half-conscious young man was bleeding gently onto the marble, watched over by two police officers whose main job seemed to be keeping the crowds from trampling the victim. On the train, we noted midnight in the company of a teen-age couple well supplied with cheap champagne, which they were kind enough to offer around. Welcome, 1987. ABOUT LONG ISLAND
