1045|1987\01\04|'ROCKY HORROR' IN BRIDGEPORT MAKES THE BEST OF THE BAD|AFTER weekend performances of ''Oliver!'' at the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, Mark Cheney's set changes from the streets and alleys of 19th-century London to the futuristic ''planet of the transsexual galaxy of Transylvania.''|AFTER weekend performances of ''Oliver!'' at the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, Mark Cheney's set changes from the streets and alleys of 19th-century London to the futuristic ''planet of the transsexual galaxy of Transylvania.'' AFTER weekend performances of ''Oliver!'' at the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, Mark Cheney's set changes from the streets and alleys of 19th-century London to the futuristic ''planet of the transsexual galaxy of Transylvania.'' Move over, Artful Dodger and Bill Sikes, and make way for Dr. Frank'n Furter (the bad, mad bisexual transvestite scientist), Riff-Raff (the hunchbacked butler), Rocky (the bleached-blond California ''Creation''), Trixie (the popcorn girl) and ''The Rocky Horror Show'' entourage. The 7:30 P.M. performances of the Dickensian musical and the 10 P.M. showings of the already passe, rock-horror show can hardly be called a double bill, as separate tickets are required for each show. In the half hour in which one audience leaves and another arrives, the set is changed. And those two audiences could not be less alike: The first show is described as a family entertainment, while the second is one for which, it is presumed, one leaves the family at home. To make the difference more evident, the theater's customary policy of bringing your own lunch bag or picnic basket does not prevail for the latter show, for ''Rocky Horror'' audiences are known for such antics as hurling rice at the stage, and the Bridgeport producers want none of that. Otherwise, the patrons deport themselves according to ''Rocky Horror'' ritual: Carrying audience participation to an extreme, they issue commands to the actors (''Go to the castle!''), comment upon the action, start and finish lines in the script and add ones that are not there. That sort of behavior has been going on for almost a decade, ever since the film version of the occult musical took on the status of a cult favorite, with audiences queued up for weekend midnight showings at movie theaters around the country -invariably equipped with word-for-word script knowledge and attired like their favorite characters in the show. In its original 1973 stage version, ''The Rocky Horror Show'' became a London hit that played for about five years. It had no such luck on Broadway, lasting a mere month in 1975. And for that, in accordance with the logic of Broadway economics, a theater was gutted - and redesigned as a cabaret. Clearly, ''The Rocky Horror Show'' is more sensibly situated in Bridgeport than it was on Broadway. What is lacking, though, is a sleazy environment. The downtown cabaret is simply too nice a place for a show like this. With its inherent tackiness, ''The Rocky Horror Show'' ought to be the pre-demolition show in a crumbling cabaret or theater. Concocted (book, music, lyric) by Richard O'Brien, ''Rocky Horror'' is an intended send-up of horrible horror movies, and an unintended sampling of bad rock music. In an interview given to a British newspaper at the time of the ''Rocky Horror'' opening in the attic of London's Royal Court Theater, Mr. O'Brien conceded that he ''didn't know how to write a play or a musical.'' He went on: ''I don't know how to construct a sentence. I'm just an actor.'' (Mr. O'Brien, under the name Ritz O'Brien, played Riff-Raff in the London and Broadway productions.) What Mr. O'Brien wanted to do, he said, was ''pull together'' the components of his youth: ''comics, rock and late-night horror movies.'' What he came up with was a limp lampoon and a quaint picture of ingenuous decadence. The ingenuousness is neatly captured by the director, Bert Bernardi, who, perhaps not so incidentally, has staged more than a dozen shows for the cabaret's Children's Company. In an inventive directorial stroke, the show starts with on-screen credits. After Trixie and three ushers sing ''Science Fiction Double Feature,'' we are transported - along with Janet and Brad, the naive, newly married couple whose car has broken down - to the Gothic castle and its demented goings on. Out of dialogue that is either inane (''If only the car hadn't broken down'') or just plain insane (with references to ''laser beams of pure antimatter'') comes the show's final, uplifting message: ''Don't dream it; be it.'' Who can imagine a more extravagant buildup to a nonsequitor? With exaggerated postures, the Bridgeport cast makes deadpan, appealing fun of appalling material. Ironically, Phil Borchet comes off more prominently as the cliche-spouting narrator than as Fagin in ''Oliver!'' Jeri Sager, the impressively tough but good-hearted Nancy of ''Oliver!'' is as effective as the gullible, silly Janet, running through the castle, all too willing to participate in raunchy misadventures. Now that ''The Rocky Horror Show'' has been dusted off for the 1980's, perhaps it is time to put it away again. ''The Rocky Horror Show,'' at the Downtown Cabaret Theater, 263 Golden Hill Street, Bridgeport. 576-1636. Performances this Friday and Saturday at 10 P.M. THEATER
