1046|1987\01\04|TEACHER'S LESSON: INVESTMENT|YOU can take David Lerner out of the classroom, but you can't take the classroom out of David Lerner.|YOU can take David Lerner out of the classroom, but you can't take the classroom out of David Lerner. YOU can take David Lerner out of the classroom, but you can't take the classroom out of David Lerner. Less than a dozen years ago, Mr. Lerner, a resident of Jericho who is now 50 years old, was teaching history and social studies at Bayside High School in Queens. Today, he is owner and president of David Lerner Associates, a privately held, Syosset-based, 300-employee investment concern that, he says, marketed $750 million in securities in 1986. ''My background - I'm a schoolteacher,'' Mr. Lerner said. ''I think what I've done is bring that same philosophy to the investment world. We view ourselves to a large degree as an educational institution. Our stock in trade, we believe, is in educating the public to the various conservative income opportunities.'' Mr. Lerner's corporation, with offices in Syosset; Lake Success; Stamford, Conn.; Teaneck, N.J.; New City, N.Y.; White Plains; Boca Raton, Fla., and on Wall Street, sells a variety of investment vehicles. ''Tax-free municipal bonds,'' he said, ''Ginnie Maes, mutual funds of all descriptions, limited-partner real-estate syndications, annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance.'' ''The only thing we don't sell and have no intention of selling is common stocks,'' he said. ''It's antithetical to our philosophy. Our appeal is to the conservative investor, and stocks simply don't fit that category. Stocks are too volatile, much too uncertain. Our appeal and our approach is one of showing people how to conservatively invest their money to enhance their yields without taking great risks.'' As the new Federal income tax structure takes effect, Mr. Lerner sees increasing attractiveness in what he calls old standbys: high-yielding income funds, municipal bonds, Ginnie Maes. ''Because of the imminent reduction of taxes,'' he said, noting the disinclination of the new code to encourage tax shelters, ''income now becomes much more attractive.'' His close involvement with the workings of capitalism is a far cry from his youth. ''I grew up thinking of myself as a socialist,'' said Mr. Lerner, one of four sons of a house painter and housewife who spent his early years in the South Bronx area known as Fort Apache. He was educated at Public School 54 and Junior High School 40, spent a year and a half convalescing from polio as a charity patient at the Blythedale Children's Hospital in Valhalla, N.Y., and graduated in 1954 from Morris High School. He continued his education at Hunter (now Lehman) College in the City University of New York and began teaching, picking up a master's degree from the City University. He started out as a social studies teacher at J.H.S. 55 in the South Bronx. He moved in the early 60's to Bayside High School, where he remained until 1975, when he left the profession and started his current business in his home. ''I think my life was evolving for a number of years before I left teaching,'' he said. ''I had worked part time selling securities and life insurance.'' His introduction to the business had come in 1960, when, newly married (he and his wife have two children), Mr. Lerner was awaiting a response to his application for summer work at a playground in the New York City school system. ''I never took a vacation,'' he said. ''I always worked three or four jobs.'' Through his wife, the former Lois Breitman, Mr. Lerner was introduced to an investment salesman, who suggested he drop by the office. ''I recall going up there wearing chino pants and a black T-shirt,'' Mr. Lerner said. ''I think in retrospect I was letting out a very strong message. I was looking upon this in a contemptuous way. It had to do with making money and the world of business. I thought that was not in keeping with the image I had of myself.'' But when shown the various investments the company marketed, he said, ''My reaction was, I can't believe I'll be paid to show people how to do this. These were mutual funds, the product seemed to be attractive and I became enthused by it.'' In 1968, Mr. Lerner began selling securities and insurance on his own while teaching full time. He began David Lerner Associates with 10 part-time employees, all schoolteachers. ''We grew very rapidly,'' Mr. Lerner said. ''I developed sales presentations, not very much different from the lesson plans I used to use as a schoolteacher, and the training materials were not very much different from the curriculums I used to work on when I was a schoolteacher.'' And to this day, Mr. Lerner speaks regularly at his company's investment seminars for the public. ''I believe now,'' he said, ''that what I've done, I've just really continued my teaching career.''  LONG ISLANDERS
