1047|1987\01\04|SURVIVAL TACTICS FOR COMPUTER WIDOWS|THE microwave beeps, the oven clock buzzes and you shout, you yell, tap out in Morse and signal by semaphore with flaming torches, ''Dinner's ready,'' while your house partner - husband, wife, roommate -types on, oblivious, at the computer keyboard, with eyes riveted to the green monitor screen.|THE microwave beeps, the oven clock buzzes and you shout, you yell, tap out in Morse and signal by semaphore with flaming torches, ''Dinner's ready,'' while your house partner - husband, wife, roommate -types on, oblivious, at the computer keyboard, with eyes riveted to the green monitor screen. THE microwave beeps, the oven clock buzzes and you shout, you yell, tap out in Morse and signal by semaphore with flaming torches, ''Dinner's ready,'' while your house partner - husband, wife, roommate -types on, oblivious, at the computer keyboard, with eyes riveted to the green monitor screen. ''Football widows'' - what do they know? Football lasts a season. ''Golf widows?'' Who can play golf in the rain? But computer widows and widowers face total shutout because a computer nut carries a theoretical PC around in his head. Ask the computaholic a question, and he answers, ''Huh?'' Poke him and his eyes, focused on the monitor in his brain, can't find you. When he surfaces, he remembers nothing that has occurred between you, to you, or because of you. Since by every account the computer is likely to recast civilization more than did the printing press in the 15th century, we all must learn to survive with it. Psychiatrists, already alerted to the risks of computer fallout, are probably now preparing self-help guidelines. In the meantime, we can each wage our own little battles by assaulting the five senses. Base the attack on the age of the computaholic. Fry onions, grind coffee or bake bread to excite the olfactory nerves of the mature spouse or roommate; bake chocolate chip cookies to better beguile a younger one. Suit your visual effects to your particular talents. While slinky negligees work only for those with something to slink, a flourishing imagination can create other images to clear the glazed eye. Consider a snapshot of a new dent in the car, an overdraft statement from the bank, a litter of your neighbor's kittens, the Yellow Pages lying open at Obstetricians. Audio assault offers stunning possibilities. Modern civilization supplies, free for the recording, such jewels of sound as the radio emergency test, the unmuffled motorcycle, the passing tractor trailer, the Sunday morning chain saw and the automated talking toy. But remember also the classics. Full-volume Stravinsky to arouse the rock-and-roll enthusiast -and vice versa. Aim for sustained sound. Taste and touch? Vary the approach from a teaspoon of Tabasco in the beer to a jar of macadamia nuts, from a shoulder massage to a spider down the back. Diversify. Tabasco today; macadamias tomorrow. Borrow from nature, which is full of attention-grabbing techniques: the dog wanting out, the baby osprey on the nest, the cow advertising for a mate (likewise, the firefly). No technique is too ridiculous. We are dealing, after all, with a ridiculous situation, namely, the total separation of two people cohabiting a house and paying together the tax, mortgage and insurance bills. How many approaches you apply and how seriously will depend on how badly your relationship has eroded. Rib roasts that turn from juicy red to brown to black in the pan and potatoes that shrivel up to prunes night after night may require only a single-pronged attack. But anger, hurt and a sense of desertion require all-out war. If you have reached the crisis point, pull the main electrical switch -after insuring that the latest computer entries are saved. Then, hand your spouse or friend a flashlight, and talk. Elaborate your feelings, not his or her negligences, and suggest an evening time-plan or an occasional computer moratorium. Only as a last resort, learn something about the computer. You hate computers? Desperate times call for desperate sacrifices. Should you discover him midway through the novel he has always yearned to put on paper or creating television graphics that will astonish the advertising world, a slight retreat on your part is excusable. As for the computer producers who foster this war, let them rally round as neutrals. To prove their good faith, let them install a DR override key so that the harried cook can emblazon on the monitor the words, ''Dinner's ready.''  CONNECTICUT OPINION
