1048|1987\01\04|WHY FOREIGN LANGUAGES ARE RELEVANT AGAIN|THE OUTLOOK for foreign-language instruction in the nation's schools hasn't looked this good in years. When the Modern Language Association held its annual convention in New York last month, 777 new college-teaching positions had been listed, an increase of more than 50 percent in the last two years, and the largest number of job openings ever.|THE OUTLOOK for foreign-language instruction in the nation's schools hasn't looked this good in years. When the Modern Language Association held its annual convention in New York last month, 777 new college-teaching positions had been listed, an increase of more than 50 percent in the last two years, and the largest number of job openings ever. THE OUTLOOK for foreign-language instruction in the nation's schools hasn't looked this good in years. When the Modern Language Association held its annual convention in New York last month, 777 new college-teaching positions had been listed, an increase of more than 50 percent in the last two years, and the largest number of job openings ever. In North Carolina, the legislature has ordered every district in the state to offer foreign languages starting at the kindergarten level and continuing through high school. And beginning next year, the California State University system will require the successful completion of two years of language study as an admission requirement for all incoming freshmen. Besides state legislatures, the trend has been fueled by pressure from Congress and business leaders who are worried that the inability of most Americans to master a second language has undermined the nation's commercial and strategic position in an increasingly competitive world. Language study is also benefiting from an awareness among students that there are practical benefits to be gained from command of a second language. Taken together, these factors have sent enrollments skyrocketing in colleges, high schools and elementary schools across the nation. The resurgence has focused new attention on a number of critical education issues. How should second languages best be taught? When should instruction begin? Which languages are the most useful for Americans to learn? There is also mounting concern over a shortage of qualified teachers for the courses being ordered, as well as complaints that legislators are unwilling to supply the money needed to run the programs set up in response to their demands. What is not subject to doubt, however, is the dimensions of the language boom at every level of schooling, from kindergarten through graduate school. Florida, for example, reported a 20 percent increase in language enrollments during the 1985-86 school year, to 283,000. In Texas, enrollments in French and Spanish have more than doubled since 1981, while in New York State, language enrollment has nearly tripled during the same time, from 230,000 to more than 650,000. ''In numerical terms, more Americans are studying foreign languages in school today than ever before,'' said C. Edward Scebold, executive director of the American Council of Teachers of Foreign Languages. ''In percentage terms, we now have almost as many students enrolled in modern foreign-language courses as we had in the early 1900's, when nearly everybody was studying Latin.'' At the turn of the century, 51 percent of all public high school students were studying Latin, while 22.1 percent of all students were studying a modern language; in 1982, the figure for those studying modern languages was 21.3 percent. Most remarkable of all, even though the number of high school students is declining, language enrollments in public secondary schools continue to rise and now total more than three million. ''It's fun to be a language teacher again,'' said Suzanne P. Jebe, who directs language programs for Minnesota, and she has much reason to think so. Gov. Rudy Perpich said in 1985 that ''we envision foreign languages beginning in the elementary grades,'' and the board of regents of the state university system recently instituted a two-year language requirement. All told, 30 states have imposed or restored some form of language requirement since the early 1980's. At the same time, about 90 major colleges, including Yale and several state systems, have made foreign languages a requirement for entry or graduation or have restored requirements. Some veterans in the field, however, regard the explosion of interest with a skeptical eye. After all, it was only a quarter-century ago that languages were riding the crest of a boom. The National Defense Education Act, passed in response to alarm over Sputnik as well as other Soviet advances in science and technology, designated mastery of certain languages as ''critical'' to America's national interests and set aside large sums of money for training programs. BUT THE campus cry for ''relevance'' as a criterion of intellectual legitimacy and the elimination of course requirements in the late 1960's led to a drastic decline of enrollments in language courses at all levels, a decline that continued well into the 1970's. By 1979, in fact, President Carter's Commission on Foreign Language and International Studies concluded that ''Americans' incompetence in foreign language is nothing short of scandalous.'' The report noted that ''the United States requires far more reliable capacities to communicate with its allies, analyze the behavior of potential adversaries and earn the trust of the uncommitted.'' Many educators date the start of the current resurgence to that document, which went on to call for the restoration of language requirements in the nation's schools. But they note that the national-security rationale offered for language programs since the 50's has been joined by a more recent concern. ''Just as Sputnik prompted the National Defense Education Act, what has largely prompted this current renewal is the concern about growing competition in international trade, especially from Japan,'' said Dr. J. David Edwards, executive director of the Joint National Committee for Languages, a lobbying group in Washington that acts on behalf of 33 language and international study organizations. ''Toyota has become the Sputnik of the 80's.'' Increasingly, educators say, language programs reflect awareness that America must scramble to hold its own in a world where it cannot assume that all foreigners speak English. Colleges that traditionally stressed literature in language courses, for example, now are offering German for Business, Scientific Russian and Computer Portuguese - specific, practical courses tailored to the career aspirations of students and the needs of businesses. ''The idea is that yuppies can be more successful with more arrows in their quiver by having a foreign language than not having it,'' explained Rose L. Hayden, president of the National Council on Foreign Language and International Studies. ''There's an economic imperative operating, and that's more compelling to many people than talk of national security.'' Even more fundamental has been the shift in the languages Americans prefer to study. Spanish continues to be the language of choice, accounting for more than half of all enrollments in courses below the university level. But as interest in other languages grows, French and especially German seem to be far less secure in their longstanding positions as clear runners-up. ''Traditionally, German is the third language, after Spanish and French,'' said Dr. Michael Legutke, a coordinator of German language programs in the Pacific Northwest who was sent to the United States by the West German Government to encourage study of the language here. ''Now, however, we are under pressure from Chinese and Japanese, especially on the West Coast, and that makes our situation difficult.'' Indeed, the fastest enrollment growth has taken place among those languages once deemed ''exotic.'' The list of the 10 most popular languages studied at the secondary and university levels, reflecting changes in perceptions of the nation's commercial and strategic interests, now includes not only Russian but also Japanese and Chinese, with Arabic and Portuguese falling just outside the top 10; in Hawaii, more students study Japanese than any other foreign language. In addition, more efforts than ever are being made to begin language instruction as early in the pupil's academic career as possible. Motivated by research indicating that language acquisition skills are at their highest in children before they reach the age of 11, a growing number of school boards are moving to include language instruction as part of the regular elementary-school curriculum even as they replace the traditional stress on memorization of grammar and vocabulary or dialogues with an emphasis on being able to speak the language being taught. North Carolina may have taken the most sweeping step in the nation with its language initiative, but it is by no means the only state moving toward an early start. Since 1980, the number of pupils in language programs in elementary schools in New York State has tripled, to 65,000, and in 1985, Louisiana's state board ordered compulsory language instruction of at least 30 minutes a day beginning in the fourth grade. In recognition that younger children seem to have a higher absorptive capacity for languages than their elders, school districts from San Diego to Montgomery County in Maryland have also begun experimenting with so-called ''immersion programs.'' Often adapting methods devised in Canada to enable youngsters who are native speakers of English to become fluent in French, educators in the United States have achieved promising results in a relatively short time through intensive instruction. One such program, now in its sixth year, is at the Eliot Elementary School in Tulsa, Okla., where 130 students are learning Spanish. At Eliot, full-time language instruction starts in kindergarten, and the teaching of all subject material is done in Spanish through the second semester of second grade. Thus these English-speaking pupils learn in Spanish to read and also learn science, social studies, mathematics, art and music in that language during their first three years in school. At that point, ''language arts'' in English are also introduced, to assure that the students develop reading, writing, spelling and oral expression skills in English that are on a level with their peers. By the time the children reach the sixth grade, they are, in effect, fully bilingual. ''The results have been very encouraging, as we have seen when it comes time for our students to take language-arts tests,'' said Evangelina Jaime-Morgan, one of six teachers in the program. ''In Spanish, they have scored above the national norms for native Spanish speakers, and in English, they tested way above national norms, the highest, in fact, in our district.'' Ms. Jaime-Morgan emphasized that all the students in the Eliot program ''come from households in which no Spanish is spoken at all, so there is no element of bilingual education here.'' Enrollment is on a volunteer basis, she said, and reaction has been so strong that there is now a waiting list. FROM the elementary to the college level, other innovative language programs are also drawing on the teaching possibilities offered by computers, video and other advanced technology. A consortium of 35 colleges have formed the Campus Satellite System to enable their students to watch offerings ranging from news programs in Russian to prayers in Arabic, all taped from satellite reception. In a program in Hawaii, students of Japanese communicate with students in Japan through electronic mail and a special phone linkup. Often, though, teachers and other advocates of language programs complain that the same state officials who demand that courses be expanded and strengthened prove unwilling to provide budget increases. ''Generally, the mandating of tougher standards has been done without state departments of education getting increased appropriations from state legislatures,'' said Ms. Hayden of the National Council on Foreign Language and International Studies. The same also appears to be the case at the Federal level. Though ''Congress has probably passed more than a dozen new programs dealing with foreign languages and international education during the past four years,'' according to Mr. Edwards, the Reagan Administration ''has literally requested zero funding for a number of those foreign-language programs.'' ''No one in government seems to be against foreign-language instruction,'' said Lisa Phillips, a staff member of the Senate Education Committee. ''There are people, however, who don't want to spend money for it.'' Although Congress has authorized expenditure of more than $55 million for new language programs in the Higher Education Act, Mr. Edwards said, only $32 million has been appropriated. Responding for Secretary of Education William J. Bennett, a spokesman, Loye Miller, said, ''The Federal contribution to total education spending in this country is, and always has been, so low that it is ridiculous to suggest that any major improvement in education will stand or fall due to Federal spending. ''It is true,'' Mr. Miller added, ''that due to very tough budget choices and high deficits the Secretary of Education has given priority to other programs, mostly those based on true need.'' But he said Mr. Bennett ''has done what he can do to foster foreign-language study,'' including making available $1.6 million in discretionary grants, announced recently, ''to improve and expand instruction in critical foreign languages.'' Language teachers also complain that at a time when governments seem to be more stingy with education funding, resistance is also being met from colleagues in other disciplines, especially math and science. ''There's only one pie, and now there's another guest at the dinner table, so everybody thinks he is going to get a smaller piece,'' said Maureen Regan, an associate professor of education at the State University of New York at Potsdam who advises school districts on language programs. More money would certainly help solve many difficulties of which language teachers and administrators complain, such as the lack of curriculum and books tailored to the needs of elementary-school students. But money can only partly alleviate a problem that many of them view as intractable: a growing shortage of language teachers. In a sense, the nation is now paying for its neglect of languages during the 60's and 70's, which has created a gap just at a time when many older teachers are preparing to retire. ''It was necessary to discourage younger people from making career plans during the 70's when the market began to slip,'' said Richard Brod, director of special projects for the Modern Language Association, the principal professional group of university language professors. ''We didn't want people to have unrealistic expectations.'' As a result, many potential language teachers were funneled into other fields. Even more worrisome to administrators, the increased national consciousness of the value of foreign-language skills means that today's graduates have a wider variety of opportunities than in the past. For corporations and banks with interests abroad, a young man or, more typically, woman with a degree in a foreign language and some understanding of another culture can be an especially attractive acquisition. Traditionally, three-quarters of all graduates with language degrees have been women. ''W E ARE eager to get teachers of Spanish and other languages, but young people with fluency are being picked up by other professions at salaries that are considerably beyond what we can possibly offer,'' said Leo Benardo, director of language programs for the New York City Board of Education. ''You can triple or quadruple your salary by doing that, so there is a limited pool available for teaching.'' To alleviate its shortage, New York City has recruited teachers in Spain, and also agreed to an arrangement in which the Government of Greece supplied and paid the salary of a teacher of Greek. But the problem is nationwide: Mr. Brannon said some school districts in Virginia had offered bonuses of $2,000 to recruit teachers of German, and in Oregon, one district unable to find teachers for its new Chinese program went all the way to China to hire an instructor. ''I'm under pressure from the Governor's office to start programs in Chinese and Japanese,'' said Walter Bartz, who supervises language programs for Indiana. ''A lot of schools would like to do that, but they can't find the needed certified teachers.'' For some countries that situation has offered new opportunities to win American friends, extend their cultural influence and shore up the position of their language in a volatile market. West Germany has sent teachers and supervisors to several states, but the most active country appears to be Belgium, which supplied more than 600 teachers of French to schools in Louisiana, Wisconsin and Ohio. ''We are receiving more inquiries than ever,'' said Eliane Levaque, who directs the Belgian program from Baton Rouge, La. ''American schools feel a certain pride in getting a foreigner to teach his native language, and in Belgium we have a surplus of teachers. So instead of putting them on the unemployment lines we select the best of them and send them over here.'' ''North America and Europe are drifting apart, and we must do everything to bring them back together,'' said Dr. Heinrich Baumhoff, education counselor at the West German Embassy. ''This type of program does away with stereotypes and cliches, and because of bad memories of two World Wars and the Nazi regime, we Germans have to do more in that respect than some others.'' School boards have generally welcomed these imported teachers. But Mr. Edwards also cautioned that ''just because you can speak the language doesn't mean you can teach it, and even if you can, you must take into account that the German or Belgian education system is very different from the American.'' At the same time, many of the same educators admit to concerns about the language skills of American teachers. Those questions have been heightened by the move toward more rigorous certification requirements, as part of the overall national drive for higher standards, now being tested in Texas by its state education department and the American Council of Teachers of Foreign Languages. A KEY PART of the certification process being developed in Texas involves a test of oral proficiency, a feature that is also expected to appear elsewhere. In order to sharpen their speaking skills, teachers are being encouraged, when money can be pried loose from school boards, to enroll in summer language institutes and to travel in countries where their language is spoken. But administrators appear to have mixed feelings about readiness-for-certification programs and the new demands being placed on teachers. ''Our teachers will need to beef up their own language skills if we are going to have long sequences of language study, so we are already starting in on that,'' said Gerard Toussaint, North Carolina's language supervisor. On the other hand, the director of language programs in one Western state said, ''If we put in an oral-proficiency requirement, we'd lose half the teachers in my state.'' Among educators,, however, the biggest fear is of what Mr. Brod called ''unrealistic expectations.'' Mindful of the bitter memories many adult Americans feel at their inability to master a language and aware that they are competing with profit-oriented programs that typically promise prospective students to be able to ''Speak Spanish Like a Diplomat'' almost overnight, foreign-language advocates have been careful not to promise too much too soon. ''I'm worried that there will be a tendency toward quick fixes, things like six-month intensive language institutes,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''There's a lot of hype about what can be achieved and how fast, and students get angry when after two years they are not proficient in the language.'' In fact, Ms. Hayden said, the resurgence of interest in languages should be seen as ''a long-term investment. We don't expect a building to be built in a day. It takes a lot of time, effort and money to dig and lay a foundation. Americans are not born lacking certain chromosomes that enable them to learn foreign languages. We just haven't tried, up to now, in the same way that other countries have. I hope this time will be different.''
