1049|1987\01\04|SMILE WHEN YOU SAY 'SCHOOL REFORM,' PARDNER|GOV. Mark White of Texas is fond of saying that the ''oil and gas of Texas's future will be the well-educated mind.'' During his four-year tenure he pushed through the most sweeping overhaul of the schools in the state's 150-year history, an act that made him a hero to some, a villain to others. He ran heavily on his school-reform record, but it wasn't enough to get him re-elected.|GOV. Mark White of Texas is fond of saying that the ''oil and gas of Texas's future will be the well-educated mind.'' During his four-year tenure he pushed through the most sweeping overhaul of the schools in the state's 150-year history, an act that made him a hero to some, a villain to others. He ran heavily on his school-reform record, but it wasn't enough to get him re-elected. GOV. Mark White of Texas is fond of saying that the ''oil and gas of Texas's future will be the well-educated mind.'' During his four-year tenure he pushed through the most sweeping overhaul of the schools in the state's 150-year history, an act that made him a hero to some, a villain to others. He ran heavily on his school-reform record, but it wasn't enough to get him re-elected. Still, there is universal agreement that Texas - a vast and proud state that is struggling to transform its economy from one based on the extraction of petroleum and on ranching and farming to one based on high technology and service industries - will not turn back the clock on its controversial education reforms. The Governor-elect, Bill Clements, a Republican former Governor, talks only of ''fine-tuning'' them when he takes office on Jan. 20. Texas's reform measures have drawn wide national attention, particularly for the uproar over a rule that bars students who fail one course from participating in any sports or other extracurricular activities for six weeks. This so-called ''no-pass, no-play'' regulation decimated many a high school team in this football-crazed state, at no small political cost to Governor White. But the highly politicized debate over no-pass, no-play has overshadowed other, profound reforms that are altering the academic and even social lives of Texas's three million schoolchildren and 175,000 teachers. Gone are the days when students were given weeks off from school to display their cows at livestock shows. Students now must pass an ''exit'' exam in English and math to be graduated from high school. A statewide minimum grade of 70 has been imposed for all courses, and ''social promotions,'' by which students are automatically passed from grade to grade at year's end, are forbidden. Classes are smaller and teachers are better paid, but many are resentful over being tested for competency, at having to claw at one another to get on a ''career ladder'' for merit-pay raises, and at being entangled in rigid new bureaucratic rules. The reforms in Texas - the third largest school system after California and New York - have drawn wide acclaim from national education experts as probably the most ambitious, comprehensive and thoroughgoing overhaul of schooling undertaken by any state except possibly South Carolina. While few of the specific measures taken in Texas were entirely innovative, their comprehensiveness and the speed with which they were adopted gave the package enormous force, in the view of Frank Newman, president of the Education Commission of the States, the Denver-based interstate agency that monitors education trends nationally. ''The education reformers took a state whose schools were still emerging and put enormous attention on quality,'' Mr. Newman said. ''That moved the state ahead enormously. Probably the most important thing was the public discussion. Texans were asked, 'What do you believe in?' '' He said he thought the reforms had begun to evolve away from ''teacher-bashing'' to encouraging more teacher involvement in change. But the real question is this: Are Texas children, whose academic performance has traditionally lagged well behind most of the nation, learning better? There is anecdotal evidence they are, but since the reforms were passed only two years ago there is still no broad, conclusive proof. A recent report by the office of the Speaker of the Texas House of Representatives, Gib Lewis, drew this conclusion:''Efforts to improve academic achievement have been intensified, and expectations have been raised. Standards are higher, and students are now required to achieve a certain level of performance. National comparisons show Texas students are average on basic skills test performance. Texas still has a long way to go before it leads the nation.'' ''We think we do have indications the reforms have been positive and will continue to be,'' said William N. Kirby, the Texas Commissioner of Education, adding that there remains strong public support for the effort. ''The recent legislature, while faced with dramatic budget shortfalls, virtually exempted public education from cutbacks. That would not have happened if the general public did not believe we were going in the right direction. Most of our people understand that for too long we have depended on oil and gas and agriculture to support the state, and that we need a better educated work force for economic survival.'' The practical day-to-day effects of reform can be seen in almost any school from Beaumont to El Paso; the Sam Rayburn High School in suburban Pasadena is as good as any place to examine reform. The 22-year-old sandy brick building, part of the Pasadena Independent School District, is the academic and social home of 2,270 students, most of them the children of the refinery and ship-channel workers who live in the industrial area southeast of Houston. About one in five students is of Mexican-American background. The legislation has disrupted the normal routines of administrators, teachers and students, but the principal, Barbara Crowson, welcomes the change. ''I hope it's here to stay,'' she said of the reforms. ''It's definitely a step in the right direction. We're sick of being told the South can't measure up.'' SHE added that teachers were being forced to pay more attention to children of lower ability, and that for their part, the students were being compelled to try harder. ''Set the standard a little higher, work a little harder,'' is the way she put it. Ms. Crowson thought the new testing requirements were beneficial in bringing performance up to national norms. ''I don't enjoy reading in the paper that Texas ranks at the bottom in achievement-test scores,'' she said. Like teachers everywhere in Texas, those at Rayburn have many complaints, especially over the shifting and subjective means that have been used to evaluate their performance. Four times a year an evaluator spends a full class period observing each teacher, grading him on 54 different items. ''A lot of them feel like they're putting on a dog and pony show rather than teaching,'' said Elizabeth Cunningham, a math teacher. ''The students know what's going on, and they'll tease you when an evaluator is in there. They'll point out if you miss a component of the lesson plan.'' The students themselves have been no less affected. Jennifer Orsak, editor of the school newspaper, The Speaker, found herself disqualified from regional journalism competitions last year because she failed chemistry. And Bryan Williams, a senior defensive tackle, said the fortunes of the school's football team were badly hurt last year when another tackle was academically disqualified. ''All our extracurricular activities have been affected,'' said Ms. Crowson, the principal, adding that 35 percent of the students participating in such activities were ineligible this year because of failing grades, though that was better than the 44 percent last year. ''But they're mostly ninth-graders, who are having to make big adjustments anyway,'' she said. ''It's better this year because the kids got the message that this is for real, it's not going away.'' Like most states of the South, Texas had allowed its educational system to fall behind the more industrialized states. For a long period, first-class schooling seemed an unnecessary luxury to Texans; the great oil boom seemed to assure well-paying jobs even to the semi-literate, and even today the utility of school reforms eludes many rural areas where most children gravitate early toward farming and manual jobs. But the collapse of the oil industry, and the growing urbanization of Texas, has stirred deep concern among Texas parents, who worry that their children cannot compete with Northern students in gaining admission to the best colleges. The Texas school overhaul was achieved with astonishing speed and urgency. In 1983, amid anxiety over the state's slumping economy, Governor White appointed a special panel on public education headed by H. Ross Perot, the iconoclastic Dallas computer magnate. At the time, Texas students ranked 47th among the 50 states in their Scholastic Aptitude Test scores, and the state ranked 43d in per-pupil spending. In his forceful style, Mr. Perot shamed Texans into action. He made much of the story, perhaps apocryphal but all too plausible to Texans, of the student who got 35 days off from school to exhibit his pet chicken at shows. At the end of June 1984 the legislature accepted his proposals in House Bill 72, or HB 72, now a household phrase. Apart from no-pass, no-play, these are the main provisions: * Teacher salaries were raised dramatically. The annual pay for a first-year teacher grew from $11,000 to $15,200. The average salary for all teachers last year was $25,160, up from $20,170 in 1984, before the bill was passed. Salaries are now at 99.4 percent of the national average. To pay for this, the legislature raised sales, cigarette and fuel taxes to generate an extra $2.8 billion over three years - at a time of declining oil revenues. * A four-step career ladder was established to reward outstanding teachers with annual bonuses. Specially trained evaluators grade the teachers in each of five teaching ''domains'' prescribed by the state; only the best qualify for a rung on the ladder. * All certified teachers and administrators were required to pass a basic-skills test in reading and writing by June 30 of last year to be eligible to keep their jobs during the current year. * A statewide system of on-the-job appraisal was established for all teachers and administrators. * All students must pass a statewide test, called Teams (Texas Educational Assessment of Minimum Skills), to be graduated. The test covers mathematics and the English language. Eighty-five percent of the 11th graders who took the test in October 1985 passed both parts; the rest were given two more chances during the 12th grade. * Credit is denied in any course for which a student has more than five unexcused absences per semester. * All students in odd-numbered grades are tested on minimum skills every year. * A prekindergarten program for poor and non-English-speaking 4-year-olds was set up. * The 27-member elected State Board of Education, beset by politics, was abolished and a 15-member board appointed by the Governor was established, although the elective system is to be revived in 1988. * State aid to local school districts was substantially increased to even out the huge disparities in spending between rich and poor districts. Polls show that the vast majority of Texas parents approve of the changes, including no-pass, no-play. But though teachers got a substantial pay increase, they are unhappy. Their leadership had supported Governor White and the proposed reforms at first, but they have grown increasingly disaffected. ''They feel some of the reforms were good, but others not,'' said James T. Butler, executive director of the 97,000-member Texas State Teachers Association. ''The emphasis on academics and smaller class size are solid achievements. But the teachers hate the competency test. The attitude was: 'We are going to make you teachers shape up,' instead of 'Tell us your ideas.' All the reforms came from the top down - the teachers did not have any say.'' Mr. Butler added that teachers now focused on the student Teams test. ''Everybody is teaching to the test,'' he complained. ''It inhibits creativity.'' It appears that many of the less politically savvy among the teachers did not understand that the testing and other career requirements were the price that had to be paid to get them raises. Lawmakers, some of whom were astonished by the semi-literate letters they received from some teachers, were unwilling to grant raises without a tightening of teacher standards. In addition, the reform was instituted at a time when, coincidentally, teachers were hit by a blizzard of paperwork resulting from a previous education bill, HB 246, passed under the previous Governor, Mr. Clements. HB 246 abolished local curriculums and set up statewide ''essential elements'' of instruction in 12 subject areas. Many teachers confused the documentation required for this program with the Perot-White reforms. The legislature recently ordered the paperwork reduced. BUT the main complaint had to do with the testing and evaluation. Even though 99.1 percent of teachers and administrators last June passed the Texas Examination of Current Administrators and Teachers - the so-called Tecat test, administered by the Texas Education Agency, the state body that runs and monitors the reforms - it rankled. ''We were classified as people who were inept,'' said Theo Van Winkle, a high school English teacher who recently resigned from the Spring Branch district in affluent West Houston to teach in a private school, partly because of the reforms. ''We were tested. The test was a farce.'' The classroom evaluations, based on achieving such objectives as projecting a positive tone, praising children and the like, also left her cold, she said. ''You get extra points for telling a child to pick his head up from the desk. So a teacher tells one kid to put his head on the desk so she can have him pick it up.'' The difficulty with these evaluations, Mrs. Van Winkle and many other teachers said, was that it controlled their salaries. Under the ''career ladder,'' better teachers are theoretically rewarded. But there is not enough money in most districts to put all deserving teachers on the ladder, and in any case, said Mrs. Van Winkle, the extra $1,500 a year or so is not worth the resentment it brings. Under the ladder system, all certified teachers are automatically put on the first rung. Those whose performance ''exceeds expectations'' go to the second level, earning an additional $1,500 to $2,000 a year, while those who are ''clearly outstanding'' ultimately can rise to the third and fourth rungs, earning an extra $3,000 to $4,000. Until recently local districts decided subjectively who got on the ladder, but a uniform statewide standard is now in effect. Morale among teachers is said to be at a statewide low, and not a few, like Mrs. Van Winkle, have quit. ''I've never seen a single action cause such a decrease in teacher morale,'' said Walt Winicki, a teacher at Kingwood High School, north of Houston. Larry Yawn, a former teacher who is Governor White's chief education adviser, is impatient with such complaints. ''The major stumbling block is that we have not accepted in this profession that someone is going to make a judgment call,'' he said. ''That is the modus operandi of every other profession. It is going to have to be accepted.'' While it may be years before the full effects of the reforms on students are known, there are some indications. In October the Dallas Independent School District reported that the percentage of varsity football players sidelined by the no-pass, no-play rule this fall had been halved, from 16 percent to 7 percent. Failure rates also dropped for junior varsity and freshman football, as well as for volleyball, cross-country and musical bands. Still, nearly one of every three freshman players failed at least one course. The Austin Independent School District reported that the percentage of students failing a course during the first grading period this year fell to its lowest level in three years, from 40 percent last year to 32 percent. And there are plenty of case studies, students like Jimmy Williams, a ninth-grader at the predominantly black Smiley High School in the North Forest district in northwest Houston, who has a history of learning disabilities and being abused as a child. He recently brought home his best report card ever, with some A's and B's, an excellent result for a student who used to fail every course. His adoptive mother, Doretha Jacquet, attributed it to HB 72. She said he improved his classwork because he wanted to play football. ''He knew he had to do it,'' said Mrs. Jacquet, adding that her son also was getting more individualized attention. Diane Traylor, Jimmy's remedial reading teacher at Smiley, praised the changes. ''The curriculum is more structured now,'' she said. ''There are more materials geared toward individual needs.'' Her assistant principal, Evelyn Stull, agreed: ''Already we are seeing students coming from the middle schools with stronger skills,'' she said. ''Scores already are up.'' But the benefits of Texas reform are not so clear in more affluent schools, such as the mostly white Kingwood High School in the Humble district north of Houston. Many administrators and teachers at the school, which already was known for its high achievers, said reforms had only added a layer of restrictions on creativity. It is too early to draw statistical conclusions statewide, according to Keith Cruse, director of student assessment at the Texas Education Agency. Last February, the Teams test was given to 948,600 students and the results will be a benchmark for future progress. But the agency has keyed the results to national norms and found that Texas students do better than average during the early grades, but worse in later grades. ''Our kids come in higher but lose rank the longer they stay in Texas schools,'' Mr. Cruse said. ONE possible consequence of the tightened standards is that the dropout rate may rise, an issue of particular concern among black and Mexican-American communities. There is no firm evidence this is yet happening. The bill calls for a gradual decrease in the dropout rate by 5 percent, and the education agency has established a ''Task Force on Dropout Prevention Alternatives'' to assist local districts. When HB 72 was passed, Texas ranked 41st among the states in the rate at which students were graduated from high school, at 65 percent, according to the Federal Department of Education. When the Texas legislature reconvenes next week there will be pressures to modify the reforms. Many, including Governor-elect Clements, want to reduce the no-pass, no-play suspension period from six weeks to three, but no one seriously talks of abolishing the rule, which has become a symbol. The legislature also is expected to give close scrutiny to the career ladder and teacher testing. But almost all agree there will be no turning back. Said Harold E. Massey, executive director of the Texas Association of Secondary School Principals: ''HB 72 sent a clear message to parents and students that education is a top priority in Texas and that academics are going to be foremost.''
