105|1987\01\01|BELGIAN DANCERS PROTEST DISMISSAL OF VALERY PANOV|Thirty-three members of the Royal Ballet of Flanders are holding a sit-in at the Antwerp headquarters of the Belgian state dance company in a protest against the recent dismissal of Valery Panov, its artistic director.|Thirty-three members of the Royal Ballet of Flanders are holding a sit-in at the Antwerp headquarters of the Belgian state dance company in a protest against the recent dismissal of Valery Panov, its artistic director. Thirty-three members of the Royal Ballet of Flanders are holding a sit-in at the Antwerp headquarters of the Belgian state dance company in a protest against the recent dismissal of Valery Panov, its artistic director. The sit-in began last Friday, forcing the closing of the building and the cancellation of three performances. The dancers say they expect to remain in the building, which houses dance studios and administrative offices, at least through Monday. ''We are planning to stay here until Panov is taken back,'' Nancy Glynn, a dancer with the 62-member company and a leader of the protesters, said yesterday. Mr. Panov, a former Kirov Ballet dancer, became internationally known when his fight to emigrate from the Soviet Union drew support from dance celebrities around the world. He and his wife, the dancer Galina Panov, emigrated in 1974. Mr. Panov was named director of the Royal Ballet of Flanders in August 1984. His contract was to have run for five years. On Dec. 1, he was informed by letter that his contract would be terminated on June 30, at the end of the season. Last Friday, the dancers say, they were informed by the company that Mr. Panov had been dismissed. Marcel Van Der Bruggen, chairman of the board of directors, said Mr. Panov was dismissed because of his administrative record. ''He didn't make a budget,'' Mr. Van Der Bruggen said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''He didn't organize the company as it was organized before. There was no inner discipline in the lessons and rehearsals. Some principal dancers danced too much outside our company.'' Trouble Over Promotions Mr. Van Der Bruggen said that Mr. Panov had also failed to follow the prescribed system of promotion within the company. ''His answer was 'I am only a creator,' '' the board chairman said. ''But then he is not an artistic director.'' He added that the board had asked Mr. Panov to reform his administrative methods. ''But he was not working to change - only to make opposition and agitation,'' Mr. Van Der Bruggen said. The board notified Mr. Panov that he would be paid through June. ''I had one of the biggest administrative machines in this place, so I never worried about talking about money,'' Mr. Panov said by telephone from Belgium yesterday. He added that he felt the board had been less than candid with him, and that the matter was ''a personal fight'' with Mr. Van Der Bruggen. Mr. Panov said he had asked the Belgian Minister of Culture to make Mr. Van Der Bruggen the head of a separate company that performs in musicals. ''That was a month ago,'' Mr. Panov said. ''He moved me. He wants to keep the power, but I will stay with the company until the end.'' He said he planned to spend New Year's Eve with the striking dancers. Friends have been taking food to the protesters, and a teacher has been helping to give them daily classes. But no one, it seemed, could figure out how to operate the company switchboard. 'He Changed This Company' The dancers do not dispute that Mr. Panov had ''a lack of organization,'' as Ben Van Cauwenburgh, a leading member of the company, put it. ''But he changed this company completely,'' Mr. Van Cauwenburgh said. ''He was a turning point. And they can't see his success.'' A dancers' committee met with members of the board of directors on Tuesday. The board refused to reinstate Mr. Panov but offered to let him continue as resident choreographer. Ms. Glynn said the dancers had met twice since Dec. 1, with 80 percent voting to support Mr. Panov at each meeting. The dancers have also conducted letter-writing campaigns, audience appeals and a press conference. ''We are now trying to meet with the Minister of Culture,'' Mr. Van Cauwenburgh said. ''But it is very difficult to talk with him. He is busy.'' ''If George Balanchine had not been supported by Lincoln Kirstein,'' Mr. Panov said, ''he would never have come in. I am very upset that behind my shoulder there is no person like Mr. Kirstein.''
