106|1987\01\01|U.S. CALLS HONDURAS TRAINING A CONTINUATION|The Defense Department said today that new maneuvers in Honduras by thousands of United States troops represented a continuation, rather than an increase, in the American military presence in that Central American neighbor of Nicaragua's.|The Defense Department said today that new maneuvers in Honduras by thousands of United States troops represented a continuation, rather than an increase, in the American military presence in that Central American neighbor of Nicaragua's. The Defense Department said today that new maneuvers in Honduras by thousands of United States troops represented a continuation, rather than an increase, in the American military presence in that Central American neighbor of Nicaragua's. The department said military engineers involved in the exercises that began this week were actually preparing the way for future maneuvers by the United States. About 1,100 troops, mostly from Fort Bragg, N.C., are participating in the first phases of the exercises, which began Monday and are to run until mid-April, officials said today. The numbers of troops could increase when the exercises move into a new phase in March, but a Pentagon spokesman said details would not be disclosed until a later date. In addition to the maneuvers announced Monday, hundreds of United States Army Reserve and National Guard troops are rotating in and out of Honduras in a separate road-building exercise known as Blazing Trails, which will bring thousands of reservists to Honduras for brief stays over the next four months. Time of High Tension While the two exercises do not represent a change of course for American military policy toward Honduras, they come at a time of high tension in the region and are important for several military reasons. Some of the facilities that are being improved are close to the Nicaraguan border. One of them, at Jamastran, is near the scene of recent fighting between Nicaraguan forces and contras, or rebels, who oppose the Nicaraguan Government. It was used by American helicopters to transport Honduran troops who fought off a Nicaraguan attack on the contras early this month. In addition, the future exercises that will use the newly enhanced facilities will more closely link American and Honduran forces and will improve American abilities to control and resupply military maneuvers in places like Honduras, officials said. Pentagon officials said that the exercises announced Monday involve 700 members of two engineering battalions stationed at Fort Bragg, N.C., along with 250 supporting troops from the same American base. The remainder of the 1,100 troops sent to Honduras for the exercise are involved in headquarters work or civil affairs, said Lieut. Col. Keith Schneider, a military spokesman. Can't Explain Report He said he was unable to explain a report by The Associated Press from Tegucigalpa, which stated that the Honduran military had put the number of Americans in the exercise at 3,000. He also noted that of the 4,500 National Guard and Reserve troops who will spend time in Honduras over the next few months for Blazing Trails, no more than 600 would be there at any one time.
