108|1987\01\01|Happy New Tax Year|The Earth, Moon and Sun are in rare alignment this week, and so is the Internal Revenue Code. Because of the first three, tides are exceptionally high. Tax rates, meanwhile, are plunging. Tax reform struck at midnight. That makes this, among other things, Happy New Tax Year.|The Earth, Moon and Sun are in rare alignment this week, and so is the Internal Revenue Code. Because of the first three, tides are exceptionally high. Tax rates, meanwhile, are plunging. Tax reform struck at midnight. That makes this, among other things, Happy New Tax Year. The Earth, Moon and Sun are in rare alignment this week, and so is the Internal Revenue Code. Because of the first three, tides are exceptionally high. Tax rates, meanwhile, are plunging. Tax reform struck at midnight. That makes this, among other things, Happy New Tax Year. New Year's Day needs no special promotion. It is already the world's most widely celebrated holiday. It's a day off everywhere from Albania to Zimbabwe, in all but 15 of the 182 countries, principalities and territories that the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company logs in its annual calendar of momentous occasions. It has not always been thus. In earlier times, the year dawned with the vernal equinox in March. In Afghanistan, it still does. But even in China and Israel, whose people celebrate their own new year with great ceremony, today is a ''New Year's Day'' holiday. Sri Lanka has another twist; it celebrates the new year today and Full Moon Day every month. But holiday-crazed Americans take the prize for celebrating almost everything else. Last year, Congress entertained 305 bills to designate a day, a week, a month or a whole year -and enacted 94. Accordingly, this is the Year of the Reader, the Year of the Americas and the Year of Thanksgiving. In addition, for Delaware, Pennsylvania and New Jersey, it's the bicentennial of statehood. For Philadelphia, it is a yearlong ''We the People 200'' celebration, commemorating the 200th anniversary of the Constitution. That will be an occasion for all America to celebrate a precious legacy from the past. The tax law provides an occasion to celebrate a sensible present legacy to the future. Anyone who lusted after lucrative real estate loopholes had his last chance yesterday. Tycoons who dreamed of capturing General Motors in a tax-friendly takeover are one day too late. For John and Jane Doe, however, it's a day to hail. Public Law 99-514 introduces lower tax rates for almost everyone, fewer exceptions for the favored few and, fairest of all, total tax relief for six million or more people at the bottom of the ladder. One new law will not a happy new year make. It is, however, a very cheerful start.
