109|1987\01\01|You Can Call the 1980's 'The Ugly Decade'|Historians and the media are pleased when they can nail down the significance of a period with evocative labels - the Age of the Robber Barons, for example, or the Roaring 20's - for they remind one of salient characteristics.|Historians and the media are pleased when they can nail down the significance of a period with evocative labels - the Age of the Robber Barons, for example, or the Roaring 20's - for they remind one of salient characteristics. Historians and the media are pleased when they can nail down the significance of a period with evocative labels - the Age of the Robber Barons, for example, or the Roaring 20's - for they remind one of salient characteristics. It begins to look as if the 1980's will have to be remembered as the The Ugly Decade, because so many distasteful things have surfaced in the first six years and may continue into the last four. We have witnessed a kind of general know-nothingness in which evading critical problems is a substitute for grappling with them, in which damage-controlling an error is better than avoiding it, in which sitting tall in the saddle is preferred to riding forward, and in which, amid the verbiage, certain essential freedoms and equalities of our national life are diminished and eroded. Notoriously, President Reagan's two Administrations have produced a massive deficit that, if allowed to grow untended for two more years, would modify our national structure. I have watched three other nations, Germany, Japan and Brazil, incur so much debt that their only solution has been to debase their currency, wipe out the debt and damage grievously the middle class. The very rich and the very poor are not seriously hurt, since the rich can afford to lose and the poor have nothing to lose. But the middle is crushed and sometimes never recovers. Meanwhile, the fortunes of the poor, the minorities and students have suffered reverses so grievous that the United States is in danger of losing its reputation as a haven. It is becoming a society in which advantage is to the rich, disadvantage to the poor. Night after night, I hear Administration spokesmen reason that, since the Dow Jones average has risen another 10 points, all is well with the Republic, ignoring the fact that oilmen in Louisiana are wallowing in bankruptcy and farmers in Iowa are losing their farms. And as I listen I recall Oliver Goldsmith's reflection on his deserted village: ''Ill fares the land, to hast'ning ills a prey, Where wealth accumulates, and men decay.'' During this decade, the accumulation of wealth has been deified. Magazines keep score and glorify the latest adventurer to amass half a billion of other people's money. The 26-year-old lawyer who hauls down his first several million is applauded just before the tardy Feds toss him in the slammer for ignoring moral laws the average high school freshman would have honored. Ivan F. Boesky becomes the prototypical financier of this decade, and the takeover artist who can orchestrate a greenmail coup has become a more lauded hero than the manager of a corporation that is hiring people and making a usable product. The manipulation of money markets is seen as a more important function than the making of things. Thriving businesses find themselves forced to assume vast debt merely to protect themselves instead of improving their productive capabilities. The ugliness of the decade crops up everywhere. The former Secretary of the Interior, James Watt, denigrated our national heritage of parks and open lands. Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d strives to rewrite our constitutional pattern, while ultraconservative religious forces are encouraged to run wild. Our public school system, one of the reasons why we became a superior society, is threatened, and under the banner of protecting home and family, government invades the bedroom and legislates through the courts an accepted code for sexual behavior. One must grant that some of the ugliness has stemmed from phenomena that no Administration could have controlled. Bad weather has hurt farmers. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries collapses and devastates the economies of Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas and Alaska. The specter of AIDS stalks the land, and terrorism disorganizes world governments. Economies in Latin America collapse and threaten our internal banking system. This has not been a lucky decade. At this unpropitious moment, the Adminstration shoots itself in the foot with its handling of the Iranian hostage crisis, selling arms to a proclaimed enemy and illegally funneling the profits into the murky situation in Central America. Our foreign policy, which other nations properly inspect with magnifying glasses, seems to have been placed in the hands of a Marine lieutenant colonel free-wheeling about the world. There has been disillusionment at home and scorn abroad. For the first time that I can recall in my work abroad, other nations are laughing at us, especially since we spent the last several years lecturing them sanctimoniously to avoid the very errors we were secretly committing. Yet despite the gloom, I believe this decade can be rescued. I pray that no smoking gun will be found in the President's hand; if none is discovered, he has a fighting chance to remedy the present disarray. I hope things can be repaired for the following reason: Since 1960, we have not treated Presidents well. John F. Kennedy was murdered, Gerald R. Ford shot at twice, Lyndon B. Johnson run out of office. Richard M. Nixon resigned, and if Ronald Reagan is emasculated America will appear to the rest of the world as just one more banana republic, unable to achieve or sustain stability. Mr. Reagan's unmatched popularity, at home if not abroad, is an asset that must not be casually wasted. What can be done to save the reputation of this decade? First, the President can stand before the American people and use his unquestioned powers of communication to say: 'I allowed an error to occur. I have corrected it. And I won't let it happen again, for I obey the laws and traditions of this nation.'' Second, he must return foreign policy to the control of those best qualified to conduct it. Cowboys in the White House cellar must be reined in. Third, he should disband his damage-control squad. If error is promptly admitted and rectified, no cleanup squad is needed. Fourth, he must knock off the windy macho verbalisms. We face serious problems, and if in his next State of the Union Message he claims we are still standing tall or that we are once again respected throughout the world because of our victory in Grenada, Congress is going to wince and listeners abroad guffaw. Further ridicule is something we cannot afford. Fifth, he must let it be seen in all he does and says that he is a humane man who cares as much for the poor and the middle class as he does for the rich, who up to now have been the principal beneficiaries of his policies. The necessary corrections can be made without violation of Republican policies, for I am much encouraged by the recent behavior of Secretary of Education William J. Bennett, who seems to have altered course in midstream, talking sense where he once ranted reaction. If he can make the switch, so can the other members of the Administration. Sixth, the President right now ought to wrestle honestly with our deficit and not rely on spurious legerdemain like the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-reduction law. Our Government should raise taxes immediately and cut expenditures dramatically. But since Republicans refuse to do the former and Democrats are unable to do the latter, I suppose we will stagger along toward a major devaluation. I doubt there is much Mr. Reagan can do to break this deadly impasse, given his strong aversion to taxing the well-to-do, but I hope he does not worsen the situation. Seventh, everything the Republican leadership does in the next two years, and all the behavior of the Democratic Congress, ought to point toward a smooth, responsibile transition to the next Administration. Last October, it looked as if that Administration would be Republican, but the debacles engineered by that party make its victory less automatic. Any observer who can predict the tickets of the two major parties in 1988 would be a master seer. I don't even have an opinion, let alone a prediction. The Ugly Decade is drawing to a close. I hope it doesn't get worse. I hope President Reagan can regroup his forces and end his spectacular incumbency in orderly fashion. But he can achieve this only if adventurism ends, only if sensible controls are established and only if the American people are addressed in words of common sense rather than in soothing verbiage.
