112|1987\01\01|HUNTERS ADVISED ON SHIFT TO STEEL SHELLS|A recent newsletter of Long Island's South Shore Waterfowlers Association contains some sound advice for those who are still resisting the use of nontoxic steel shot for duck and goose hunting.|A recent newsletter of Long Island's South Shore Waterfowlers Association contains some sound advice for those who are still resisting the use of nontoxic steel shot for duck and goose hunting. A recent newsletter of Long Island's South Shore Waterfowlers Association contains some sound advice for those who are still resisting the use of nontoxic steel shot for duck and goose hunting. Long Island gunners in particular should realize, writes Steve Sanford, a waterfowl biologist with the State Department of Environmental Conservation, that the new steel loads will be required throughout the region in the 1987-1988 season. He advises Long Islanders to purchase no more lead-loaded shells than will be needed for this season's hunting. One might go a step further and suggest that, even if one hunts in an area where it isn't legally required, one should purchase a few boxes of steel-loaded shells and begin to test their efficacy. Great numbers of waterfowl die each year after eating spent lead pellets and, after decades of research, steel shot has emerged as the best nontoxic substitute. After more than 10 years of often bitter debate involving hunters, conservation organizations and state and Federal wildlife agencies, the Department of the Interior, prodded by court action initiated by the National Wildlife Federation, announced this year a program to phase out lead shot for waterfowling throughout the nation by 1991. The plan calls for first making steel shot mandatory in counties in which the annual duck harvest has been more than 20 birds per square mile. In New York State this year, this will involve Suffolk, Nassau, Jefferson, Wayne and Genesee counties. Hunter resistance to steel shot focuses on two things: The lighter steel pellets do not retain their velocity as well as lead pellets of the same diameter and therefore have less penetration at longer ranges, and steel shot can damage the barrels of fine old double guns. On the other hand, steel loads tend to produce more uniform patterns because the harder pellets are more uniform in size and shape than those of lead and also highly resistant to deformation when traveling down a gun barrel. As one who has used steel shot on both ducks and Canada geese for the last few years, I have seen no difference in practical results when shooting at ranges out to 40 or 45 yards. If you are ''on'' the birds at those distances, they will be cleanly killed with the steel-loaded shells. Another objection to steel loads is that they are more expensive, about 25 percent, than their lead counterparts, and this situation isn't likely to change very much. Over the years, many hunters have saved money by loading their own shotshells. There are a few companies offering reloading components for steel shot, an endeavor that calls for more care and precision than does reloading with lead shot. If one goes waterfowling fewer than a dozen times a year, the savings realized aren't worth the trouble. One should take care to prevent steel-loaded shells from getting wet. The pellets will rust, and an extreme result of this could be a charge fused into a near-solid mass. Factory-loaded shells with their new plastic hulls are highly resistant to rain or even being dropped into a pool of water in boat or blind. Lead pellets cannot rust, of course. I write of water-soaked shells from experience. Many years ago when I was in graduate school and as poor as a churchmouse, I often couldn't afford a box of shells with which to go forth and augment the family larder. I was given some shells that the members of a posh gunning club had decided were too old and had heaved by the case into the salt pond that fronted their holdings. A week or two after those shells went overboard, a friend dredged many of them up while oystering and gave half to me. In those days, the shell hulls, or cases, were made of paper that was waterproofed with wax. I arranged those shells, row on row, on newspapers under the black iron kitchen stove, gave them about a month to dry out and began to use them. They were swollen by the immersion, but I got around that by peeling off layer after layer of paper until they would fit in my old double gun. Hunting with them was an unnerving experience. Some performed as a new shell should, but about one in four failed to fire or produced a minuscule explosion that barely drove the pellets from the barrel. Although it is highly unlikely that any reader might have both the opportunity and the inclination to duplicate this caper, I must advise against it. It could result in damage to self or shotgun. OUTDOORS
