113|1987\01\01|SPRINGSTEEN ALBUM: A SURE THING|The end of 1986 was the time of the monolith: Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band's ''Live/1975-85.'' Selling as fast as it could be trucked into record stores, blanketing FM airwaves, the five-LP/three-CD set made its debut in Billboard's No. 1 position and has stayed there through December. It's a fine album - but its status as the year's major rock event isn't a good sign.|The end of 1986 was the time of the monolith: Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band's ''Live/1975-85.'' Selling as fast as it could be trucked into record stores, blanketing FM airwaves, the five-LP/three-CD set made its debut in Billboard's No. 1 position and has stayed there through December. It's a fine album - but its status as the year's major rock event isn't a good sign. The end of 1986 was the time of the monolith: Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band's ''Live/1975-85.'' Selling as fast as it could be trucked into record stores, blanketing FM airwaves, the five-LP/three-CD set made its debut in Billboard's No. 1 position and has stayed there through December. It's a fine album - but its status as the year's major rock event isn't a good sign. ''Live/1975-85'' is a long-awaited document of rock's most highly praised live performances, but it carries its monumentality lightly. As the album follows Mr. Springsteen's progress from clubs to stadiums, from ''king of the alley'' to high-flown rock poet to self-conscious working-class bard, it shows he hasn't forgotten how to hang loose. Just when the outlook for Mr. Springsteen's characters seems irredeemably bleak and the music starts to trudge, the next song rocks out. While ''Live/1975-85'' is a triumph for Mr. Springsteen (and one more vindication of the college radio stations, critics and fans who latched on to him in 1972 and never let go), the album's riotous reception doesn't simply reflect its high quality. ''Live/ 1975-85'' is also a consumer product involving no little calculation, including its Christmas-season release date. ''Live/1975-85'' isn't just the year's Big Thing; it's also a sure thing. It's a sure thing for radio exposure on FM rock stations that are playing older, proven, guitar-centered, midtempo rock up to 80 percent of the time, in a format misnamed ''classic rock.'' It's a sure thing to receive intense promotion from Columbia Records and from record stores, which count on a giant Christmas seller to bring in customers. And it's a sure thing for Mr. Springsteen, who unveils only one song newer than his 1984 album ''Born in the U.S.A.'' A live album is a standard holding action for both superstars and would-be stars; it's a chance to revive older songs, rev up recent ones and add a few favorite covers of other songwriters. It's worth remembering that in 1975-76, the British rocker Peter Frampton's ''Frampton Comes Alive'' became, briefly, the all-time best-selling album. It, too, fit FM-rock formats perfectly. At this point in his career, it may be Mr. Springsteen's role to make honorable use of pop-business as usual. He made his live album a generous one - comparatively low-priced (discounted to $30 or under, it costs considerably less than what the traffic would bear), well-packaged and stocked with Springsteen songs that hadn't appeared on albums. And knowing the kind of wide media exposure it would inevitably get, Mr. Springsteen made the first single and video clip - the cover of Edwin Starr's Motown hit ''War'' - carry an explicit message. The record business learns from its blockbusters. A few years ago, such multimillion-sellers as Michael Jackson's ''Thriller,'' David Bowie's ''Let's Dance,'' Cyndi Lauper's ''She's So Unusual,'' Prince's ''Purple Rain,'' Tina Turner's ''Private Dancer'' and Mr. Springsteen's ''Born in the U.S.A.'' suggested that there was an audience ready to accept multifarious combinations of rock, pop and funk; while the upshot was a slew of ''multiformat'' albums that tried to please everyone while taking no chances, a few promising hybrids emerged, among them Paul Simon's poly-ethnic pop and the rap-metal of the Beastie Boys. By contrast, ''Live/1975-85'' proves only that sure things are sure things. Solid as the music is, the album is still a retrospective. It only looks back. Music for Young Fogies ''Live/1975-85'' capped a year in rock that might be characterized as the Revenge of the Baby Boom. Tempos slowed; the Top 40 was riddled with ballads, usually a sign of an older audience, and song lyrics gazed toward the gauzy, halcyon 1960's. Huey Lewis and the News supplied a young fogies' manifesto with ''Hip to Be Square.'' Aretha Franklin's ''Jimmy Lee'' linked first love to a Motown beat, while Eddie Money explicitly summoned the early 1960's in ''Take Me Home Tonight'' with the voice of Ronnie Spector, herself, singing ''Be My Baby.'' Blues and 1960's soul, seen from 20 years later as a single style, showed up in the music of Peter Gabriel, the Fabulous Thunderbirds, Simply Red and Robert Cray; Prince and the Bangles reveled in psychedelia and 1960's pop, while R.E.M. scored a major hit with a 1960's throwaway, ''Superman.'' John Cougar Mellencamp's ''R.O.C.K. in the U.S.A.'' is subtitled ''A Salute to 1960's Rock.'' Another 1960's legacy, songs with a political flavor, also re-emerged -not just Bruce Springsteen's ''War,'' but Bruce Hornsby's ''Way It Is'' (about dignity battling unemployment and race discrimination), Genesis' ''Land of Confusion'' (which has nebulous lyrics but has been marketed with a video clip that openly mocks Ronald Reagan) and Timbuk 3's sardonic ''The Future's So Bright, I Gotta Wear Shades'' (about ''studying nuclear science''). Those shifts in tempo and topic could mean baby-boomers are once again flaunting their numerical strength. Certainly the record business sees it that way; all the major labels activated or reactivated their jazz divisions this year to release music (and sometimes background music) aimed at more mature listeners. The continuing sales explosion of compact disks - a high-priced way of buying music, and the province of well-heeled consumers - also suggests that boomers are business. Then again, as songs slow down and arrangements grow plush, rock and pop may just be drifting away from their traditional constituency. Younger whipper-snappers (up into their mid-20s), with the short attention spans and the fondness for noise, can get more and better special effects from television and movies -particularly now, when radio programmers are all but eliminating new bands and new music from their playlists. It will take music that raises hackles and unnerves young fogies, and finds ways for the public to hear it, to revitalize the younger pop audience - and to remind their parents that real 1960's music was anything but bland. Food-Music Connection Predicting rock-and-roll's future is a thankless task, but recent years suggest a new kind of correlation: food fads have been leading rock fads by six months to a year. The vogue for blackened redfish and Bayou peppers presaged a flurry of Cajun-tinged rock, from Rockin' Sidney's ''My Toot-Toot'' to Dire Straits' ''Walk of Life.'' A Caribbean craze was reflected in a new lilt for songs by Lionel Richie, the Miami Sound Machine and Steve Winwood. Then there was a rediscovery of all-American food, and a resurgence of hard-rocking, guitar-driven American bands from Bon Jovi to the de-funked Talking Heads. In hindsight, it all sounds simple. But for the would-be oracle, the trick is finding how to apply the food metaphor. At the moment, homey bistros, grazing menus and fish specialists seem to be proliferating in New York. Does this mean we should expect cabaret songs? Short-short rockers? Sea chanteys? In six months, the answer should be obvious. CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
