114|1987\01\01|Afghan Throne of Bayonets|As the Afghanistan war grinds into its eighth year, the Soviet Union seems of two minds about its bloodiest encounter since World War II. Mikhail Gorbachev now feeds hopes of withdrawal and reconciliation. He even permits open criticism of the war by Andrei Sakharov. Yet there are only token reductions of a Soviet occupation army of 110,000.|As the Afghanistan war grinds into its eighth year, the Soviet Union seems of two minds about its bloodiest encounter since World War II. Mikhail Gorbachev now feeds hopes of withdrawal and reconciliation. He even permits open criticism of the war by Andrei Sakharov. Yet there are only token reductions of a Soviet occupation army of 110,000. As the Afghanistan war grinds into its eighth year, the Soviet Union seems of two minds about its bloodiest encounter since World War II. Mikhail Gorbachev now feeds hopes of withdrawal and reconciliation. He even permits open criticism of the war by Andrei Sakharov. Yet there are only token reductions of a Soviet occupation army of 110,000. The investment in roads and bases implies a policy of absorption and annexation. The war's costs in life are bitter, most unforgivably for the Afghan people. Hundreds of thousands are dead; perhaps five million, a third of the population, have fled to Pakistan and Iran. Yet resistance is unabated and so is the world's denunciation of an unwarranted attack on a nonaligned neighbor. The Soviet posture confirms an adage attributed to the Rev. William Inge, once Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral: ''A man may build himself a throne of bayonets, but he cannot sit on it.'' It's not Mr. Gorbachev's throne, not yet. He has made cautious moves toward extrication. He has installed a new leadership in Kabul, and is making overtures to non-Communist Afghan exiles. Soviet television no longer ignores the war, but even reports on casualties. And Soviet diplomats claim agreement on all but one element in a United Nations plan to bring about a Soviet withdrawal in exchange for an end to outside aid to the Afghan insurgents. The remaining snag is ostensibly the timetable. Moscow says it needs years to pull out its troops; Pakistan insists that only months are required. Yet the real obstacle, almost certainly, is Soviet unwillingness to see the triumph of an Islamic tribal insurgency over a Marxist client regime. At stake in Moscow's eyes is the Communist doctrine that the march of Soviet power is irreversible. But that doctrine, like the war, has unacknowledged roots in the czarist past. Under Alexander II (1855-81), Russia added 400,000 square miles of territory in Central Asia, as big as Western Europe. Over time the czars overwhelmed resistance, and in an imperial age, nobody cared. The difference now in Afghanistan is that much of the world does care. The test for Mr. Gorbachev, as it was for the United States in Vietnam, is whether he is prepared to lose, or risk losing. To acknowledge a blunder of such magnitude would have adverse repercussions for Soviet power at home and in Eastern Europe -though it also might open the way for a rapprochement with China. But carrying on is hardly more attractive. Short of Moscow's sending a million troops, the Afghan resistance is bound to continue. What's worse: the costs of admitting a huge mistake or of indefinitely bleeding the Soviet Union and an Islamic neighbor? If Mr. Gorbachev is big enough to scorn the latter course, he can bring this cruel war finally and mercifully to an end.
