116|1987\01\01|U.S. LIFTS OBSTACLE TO ROAD LEADING TO CARTER COMPLEX|A Federal district judge here has removed the last Federal obstacle to construction of a 2.4-mile-long highway that will provide easy access between downtown Atlanta and the Carter Presidential Center. He ruled that state highway officials had satisfied all environmental concerns.|A Federal district judge here has removed the last Federal obstacle to construction of a 2.4-mile-long highway that will provide easy access between downtown Atlanta and the Carter Presidential Center. He ruled that state highway officials had satisfied all environmental concerns. A Federal district judge here has removed the last Federal obstacle to construction of a 2.4-mile-long highway that will provide easy access between downtown Atlanta and the Carter Presidential Center. He ruled that state highway officials had satisfied all environmental concerns. The decision by the judge, William C. O'Kelley, handed down last week, does nothing, however, to remove local opposition to the $22 million Presidential Parkway, nor does it lift an injunction imposed by the Georgia Supreme Court. Alva Byrom, an engineer in the State Highway Department, said that the Federal ruling ''obviously relieves us of any problems with the Federal Government.'' But highway officials will still have to get the Georgia court to lift its injunction if it is to proceed with condeming land for the road. The State Supreme Court ruled in November that the Highway Department could not condemn land under a television broadcast tower owned by Cox Communications because motorists could be endangered by falling ice, which sometimes forms on the tower's guy wires. Mr. Byrom said, ''We intend to finalize the right of way and settle with Cox, but I have no idea when that will be.'' Appeal Almost Certain An appeal of the Federal court decision by opponents of the parkway is almost certain. Sally Dorn, a lawyer and co-chairman of a neighborhood group opposed to the road, said: ''There is no question that the judge erred, it's just a matter of where. We clearly feel that the decision is an appealable order.'' Miss Dorn's group has snarled the state's construction efforts almost from the beginning. A bid for the parkway was let in November 1984, but opponents were able to get a temporary restraining order in February 1985. Although some bridge abutments were built, land was cleared and trees were felled, construction has been at a standstill ever since. Without the parkway, visitors must use residential streets to reach the center from downtown Atlanta. Despite the increased traffic, residents of the area around the center oppose the parkway because they say it would destroy public parks and the ambiance of historical neighborhoods. Except to say that the parkway is necessary, former President Jimmy Carter and officials of the 133,000-square-foot Carter Presidential Center, which was dedicated this fall, have avoided comment on the project. $25 Million Complex The former President hopes the $25 million complex will play an important role in promoting human rights and combating world hunger. The center consists of the Presidential Museum, the Jimmy Carter Library, Global 2000, the Carter Center of Emory University and the Carter-Menil Human Rights Foundation. The museum is the only part of the complex already accessible to the public. In the first two months of its operation, about 750 people a day visited it. That rate is less than half the pace projected by officials, who foresaw 600,000 annual visitors. That estimate assumed the parkway would be built. The library is to house 27 million documents from Mr. Carter's presidency. Frank Ranew, a spokesman for the center, said: ''The documents are being moved in and filed. By the end of January, the research center will open for use by scholars.'' Health and Agricultural Projects Global 2000's aim is to cultivate primary health care in underdeveloped countries and to initiate agricultural programs in starving nations. Mr. Ranew said Global 2000 programs wee under way in the Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia, Ghana and Zimbabwe. The Carter Center of Emory University has nine fellows, all Emory University professors. ''It's designed for scholarly research in the area of human rights, peace in the Middle East, nuclear disarmament and the like,'' Mr. Ranew said. The Carter-Menil Human Rights Foundation, the newest facet of the center, recently bestowed its first honor, a $100,000 prize to be shared by the Soviet dissident Yuri F. Orlov and Mutual Support Group, a human rights organization in Guatemala.
