119|1987\01\01|O'CONNOR SEES MIDEAST ROLE FOR VATICAN|John Cardinal O'Connor said today that he would probably suggest to Pope John Paul II and other Vatican officials that they consider taking the lead in calling an international conference to work out a Middle East peace settlement.|John Cardinal O'Connor said today that he would probably suggest to Pope John Paul II and other Vatican officials that they consider taking the lead in calling an international conference to work out a Middle East peace settlement. John Cardinal O'Connor said today that he would probably suggest to Pope John Paul II and other Vatican officials that they consider taking the lead in calling an international conference to work out a Middle East peace settlement. In raising the proposal, the Cardinal, who is to travel to Israel on Thursday, was again taking a stand that is at odds with Israeli views of the Middle East situation. The Israelis have said they prefer direct negotiations between the parties disputing a given issue or piece of territory, although they have moved to acceptance of an international forum as a stage that would precede direct talks. Those Arab governments that have urged the convening of an international conference have usually suggested that either the five permanent members of the Security Council or only the United States and the Soviet Union sponsor such a conference. 'From a Moral Perspective' Papal sponsorship, the Cardinal said, could be seen as an alternative should the other approaches prove unworkable. However, he said he had not discussed the proposal with Vatican officials, whom he plans to see after completing his visit to Israel on Jan. 5. ''If Rome doesn't consider it a good idea, it will last a quarter of a second,'' he said. The Cardinal, who is the Archbishop of New York, said he was not making the proposal out of any expertise on the Middle East but because ''I think it's a good idea to bring participants in any conflict together.'' As with his calls for self-determination for the Palestinian people, he said he was ''attempting to answer questions from a moral perspective.'' The Cardinal's decision to visit Israel grew out of criticism by Israeli and American Jewish groups of remarks he made favoring the idea of a Palestinian homeland. Meetings Are Canceled A diplomatic controversy has arisen over his decision, under Vatican pressure, to cancel meetings with several high-ranking Israeli officials. The Vatican has indicated that it objects principally to the idea that the Cardinal was to hold the meetings in Jerusalem, which it does not recognize as Israel's capital. The Cardinal said the Vatican would be a fitting sponsor for an international conference because it is ''the one worldwide moral entity that might be seen as most objective, that has generally been seen as pursuing peace over the years.'' At a news conference concluding his three-and-a-half-day visit to Jordan, the Cardinal also repeatedly urged Americans to ''rid ourselves of stereotypes'' of Arabs and Palestinians as terrorists. ''This is a grossly distorted image of a deep and ancient culture,'' he said. ''There is a deep yearning for peace on the part of Arab countries.'' Still, he added, ''one cannot excuse those guilty of terrorist acts for helping to bring about this image.'' Good Will Toward Israelis The Cardinal's statement today followed several other assertions he has made while in Jordan that may not sit well with Israeli officials. The Cardinal's urging that self-determination be granted to the Palestinian people is a linguistic formula for Palestinian political rights that neither Israel nor the United States has accepted. He has also suggested that unless the Palestinian problem is solved soon, Middle East tensions could spill over into war within a year or two. Asked today whether his recent statements on the Palestinians would rub salt in Israeli wounds, he responded: ''It's always a possibility, but it was never intended. I have nothing but good will toward the Israeli people.'' But, he said, ''I must say what I believe'' and that ''doesn't cast any aspersions on the Israeli people.'' He compared his speaking out on the Palestinians to his statements expressing concern about homelessness in New York. In speaking out about the homeless crisis in New York, he said he was calling attention to a severe problem that demands correction, not blaming the Reagan, Cuomo or Koch administrations. Visits Refugee Centers Similarly, he said, there are ''hundreds of thousands of homeless people in Palestine'' living in refugee centers that he must speak out about without necessarily blaming Israel. The Cardinal's decision to display his sympathy for the plight of the Palestinians has been apparent from some of the stops he chose to make in Jordan. On Monday, he visited the Baqaa refugee center, a crowded and squalid place of more than 65,000 refugees displaced by the 1967 Mideast war. Today, he visited a clinic for pregnant women and new mothers and their children, whose clients are largely Palestinians from the Schneller refugee center in Amman. The clinic is run by the Pontifical Mission for Palestine, a Vatican agency to aid Palestinian refugees that is financed by an American group headed by the Cardinal. Dr. Mazin S. Hanna, the clinic's 36-year-old Palestinian doctor, told the Cardinal that there was much less malnutrition than years before but that because of sanitary conditions at the center many of the children he sees still suffer from diarrhea and frequent bacterial infections. Emerging from the clinic into a bright morning sun, the Cardinal said the visit had persuaded him that the Palestinian patients there ''are certainly not in any way masters of their own destiny.'' Asked why he was choosing to make so many strong statements about the plight of the Palestinians, the Cardinal said: ''Only because I'm here. I didn't come with any vision of doing this. When I get among a people like this, more thoughts come to my mind.'' When he gets to Israel, he said, ''I hope to demonstrate my balance.''
