120|1987\01\01|American Petrofina Under Investigation|American Petrofina Inc., an oil and petrochemical company based in Dallas, is being investigated by the Energy Department for possible violations of former industry price and distribution regulations, an Energy Department spokesman confirmed today.|American Petrofina Inc., an oil and petrochemical company based in Dallas, is being investigated by the Energy Department for possible violations of former industry price and distribution regulations, an Energy Department spokesman confirmed today. American Petrofina Inc., an oil and petrochemical company based in Dallas, is being investigated by the Energy Department for possible violations of former industry price and distribution regulations, an Energy Department spokesman confirmed today. The company, which could be required to pay penalties of $841.1 million, is accused of raising its crude oil prices above those allowed by Federal regulations in 1979 and 1980, according to an article today in The Dallas Morning News. The company was able to charge more than $359 million above allowed prices by transferring its oil through a number of companies and circumventing investigators, the report said. The article, which cited a copy of an internal Energy Department draft of a proposed remedial order, said that company employees had testified that Petrofina's chairman, Paul D. Meek, and other executives knew about the pricing scheme and had concealed the violations from Federal investigators. ''We understand that a review is under way, but no final decision has been made by the D.O.E. to bring any action against Fina,'' the company said today. The company has not been shown the draft of the preliminary order, according to a source at Petrofina, It declined to comment further pending the outcome of the review. Jack C. Vandenberg, a spokesman for the Energy Department in Washington, said officials from the Federal agency and the company met yesterday in Washington to discuss the investigation, which has been under way for more than a year. He said that the draft of the proposed order was an internal document and would not necessarily be issued in its current form, if at all. American Petrofina is an affiliate of Petrofina S.A., a Belgian company. COMPANY NEWS
