121|1987\01\01|SHULTZ TO PRESS CONGRESS FOR INCREASE IN CURRENT FOREIGN AID BUDGET|The Reagan Administration has decided to press Congress for a 7.8 percent increase in its $16.6 billion foreign affairs budget - most of it for economic and military aid - for this year, and a modest rise in the next fiscal year, State Department officials said today.|The Reagan Administration has decided to press Congress for a 7.8 percent increase in its $16.6 billion foreign affairs budget - most of it for economic and military aid - for this year, and a modest rise in the next fiscal year, State Department officials said today. The Reagan Administration has decided to press Congress for a 7.8 percent increase in its $16.6 billion foreign affairs budget - most of it for economic and military aid - for this year, and a modest rise in the next fiscal year, State Department officials said today. Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who has complained publicly that sharp reductions by Congress in the foreign affairs budget had ''cut the legs right out from under us,'' has agreed to take the lead in the public relations effort for the $1.3 billion increase, officials said. The foreign affairs budget includes money allocated to foreign aid, international lending institutions, embassy protection and overseas radio broadcasting. A high department official acknowledged today that the new drive, which Mr. Shultz will open on Monday at a news conference, may include ''some unusual gimmicks.'' May Use a T-Shirt He said, for instance, that to get attention in coming weeks, Mr. Shultz was considering holding up a child's T-shirt with ''1987'' written on it and comparing his getting into the shirt with the difficulty of meeting the nation's national security obligations with a budget that makes it impossible. The Administration had originally sought $22 billion for its foreign affairs account in the current 1987 fiscal year, but Congress cut it to $16.6 billion. Because Israel and Egypt were guaranteed by Congress to receive $3 billion and $2.1 billion respectively, this has led to drastic cuts in funds for other nations. The alternative to such cuts would be for Congress to approve a supplemental request, which is to be announced on Monday. Also to be announced is the target of $19 billion for the overall foreign affairs budget for the 1988 fiscal year, which begins next Oct. 1. Because of the priority given to the campaign to increase the money available for foreign aid and other international programs, the State Department was permitted by the Office of Management and Budget to begin briefing key members of Congress and their staffs a week earlier than usual. The briefings have taken place this week. Reaction Not Encouraging But the initial reaction from Congress, State Department officials said, was not very encouraging. Congress, in cutting back on foreign aid this year, had made the point that it would listen to requests for raising the total only if the Administration proposed a tax increase to cover the additional costs or could show that the increase was offset elsewhere in the budget. ''It all depends on the nature of the offsets - otherwise the request is D.O.A.,'' a department official said, using the acronym for ''dead on arrival.'' A major reason for the supplemental request was to meet commitments to allies that permit rights for American bases, officials said. The request includes $50 million in military grants for the Philippines, doubling the amount previously allocated for 1987. It calls for $200 million in low-interest credits to Spain, in addition to the $105 million allocated already. Turkey would receive $125 million in military grants in addition to the $490 million approved in the regular 1987 allocation for grants and loans. Portugal would receive $30 million in grants above the previous $80 million. To Aid African Railroad In addition, the supplemental request includes $297 million in cash grants above the $3.55 billion previously approved. This includes $50 million to help South Africa's neighbors put into operation a railroad ending in Mozambique to avoid the need to use South Africa's ports. The supplemental request would also provide an additional grant of $200 million for Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica. The United States Information Agency would receive an additional $17.7 million, and the Voice of America, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty would receive nearly $25 million to cover the deficits caused by the decline of the dollar overseas. In the 1988 budget request, the Administration is seeking $500 million to cover a special fund for hunger relief in Africa, as well as an additional $100 million for the continent, for a total of $600 million, well above the $486 million now allocated. The military assistance being sought in 1988 amounts to $5.7 billion, an increase over the less than $5 billion approved in 1987, but less than the $6.6 billion originally requested for 1987.
