123|1987\01\01|PRICES PAID TO FARMERS DOWN 2.4%|The prices that farmers received for raw products in December were an average of 2.4 percent below November's levels, and ended 1986 down 5.5 percent from a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today.|The prices that farmers received for raw products in December were an average of 2.4 percent below November's levels, and ended 1986 down 5.5 percent from a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today. The prices that farmers received for raw products in December were an average of 2.4 percent below November's levels, and ended 1986 down 5.5 percent from a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today. Department officials say the nation's farm income has generally stabilized and could show ''moderate growth'' in 1987. But the slide in farmland values was expected to continue, further eroding assets and reducing the borrowing power of farmers. The report said that lower prices for oranges, tomatoes, broilers, cattle, hogs and turkeys contributed most to the decline in the price index from its November level. Higher prices for cotton, strawberries, corn and lettuce helped soften the drop. No new figures were reported for the prices paid by farmers to meet expenses. The most recent average computed in October showed farm expenses running six-tenths of 1 percent below levels a year earlier. The next quarterly revision of that index is scheduled in January. Beef and Hog Prices Drop Changes in grain prices were mixed in December, the report said. Prices for beef cattle and hogs were down, but calf prices were higher. ''Average lamb prices were up sharply, but broiler and egg prices were down,'' the report said. ''The all-milk price was unchanged. Sharply lower prices for oranges and tomatoes were important factors in the month-to-month decrease of the commercial vegetable and all-fruit indexes.'' According to the preliminary December figures, based mostly on midmonth averages, prices of crops declined by an average of 2.9 percent from November and 16 percent from December 1985. Prices of commercial vegetables at the farm were down 14 percent from November and 28 from the period a year ago. Prices for sweet corn, onions, celery and carrots dropped, while prices for lettuce rose slightly. Fruit prices in December dropped 11 percent from November and were 2.3 percent below levels of a year earlier, primarily because of a sharp decline in the prices of oranges. Higher prices for strawberries and grapefruit partly offset the drop. Prices for feed grain and hay rose 1.3 percent from November but were down 29 percent from a year earlier. The price index for livestock and livestock products was down 2.8 percent from November but up 2.9 percent from December 1985. Net farm income is forecast by the Agriculture Department at about $28 billion this year, down from $30.5 billion in 1985. Economists are forecasting an increase to about $32 billion in 1987.
