124|1987\01\01|JORDANIAN SAYS HE EXPECTS FEW DETAILS ON IRAQI JET HIJACKING|A senior Jordanian official says he thinks few details are likely to emerge about who was behind the hijacking a week ago of an Iraqi airliner.|A senior Jordanian official says he thinks few details are likely to emerge about who was behind the hijacking a week ago of an Iraqi airliner. A senior Jordanian official says he thinks few details are likely to emerge about who was behind the hijacking a week ago of an Iraqi airliner. The death toll, put at 67 by Iraq, was the highest in the history of air piracy. The official indicated that Jordan had agreed not to challenge what are apparently the wishes of Saudi Arabia and Iraq to suppress further details of the hijacking. There have been unconfirmed reports that dissident Iraqi security officials might have played a role in the commandeering of the plane. Jet Crashed in Saudi Arabia The Iraqi Airways Boeing 727, which was on a scheduled flight from Baghdad to Amman, crash-landed and blew up near a remote airfield in northern Saudi Arabia. Survivors said that hijackers exploded two grenades in the passenger cabin and that a gun fight broke out with security guards. All of the dead passengers were reported to have been from Arab and Moslem countries. Saudi Arabia has not even officially said that a hijacking attempt took place. It also declined to investigate the accident itself, as required under international aviation rules. Instead, Saudi Arabia sent survivors, the dead bodies and key parts of the plane to Baghdad at Iraq's request. Asked about the whereabouts of the plane's flight recorder, which records all activities in the pilot's cabin, the Jordanian official said he assumed the device had been sent to Baghdad. The ''black box'' is usually a key element in any airline accident investigation. No Word From Iraq The Iraqi authorities have also withheld information about the hijacking, beyond making public the names of the dead and saying they were citizens of Iraq, Jordan, the Sudan and Egypt. Most of the survivors are believed to be still in Baghdad. At first, the Jordanian authorities expressed anger with the withholding of information by Saudi Arabia and Iraq. Amman pressed them to reveal more about the incident and passed on what they already knew to Western reporters. In particular, Jordanian officials said they suspected that the hijackers had been helped in smuggling weapons aboard the plane through the Baghdad airport's tight security system by dissident elements in the police and that the hijackers might even have been dissident security guards themselves. But a high-ranking Jordanian official has now said that the Jordanian Government considers the matter closed and will say nothing more about it. Jordanian journalists said that local papers had been told by the Government to drop the story. The Jordanian official indicated that Amman did not want to embarrass President Saddam Hussein of Iraq further at a time when he is locked in a bitter six-year-old war with Iran. J Western diplomats in Amman say that Iraq and Saudi Arabia are able to hush up the hijacking incident only because no Americans or other Western citizens were involved. As a result, Western governments are not pressing for a full, public inquiry.
