127|1987\01\01|LOYALTY MOTIVATES LIONS LINEBACKER|He was reluctant to leave Penn State with an incomplete grade in football. Shane Conlan decided that to come so close to being part of the No. 1 team in the country last season, and then pass up a second chance, would be like a student quitting school only a few credits short of earning a degree. What's more, there was a matter of loyalty, no small consideration in this case.|He was reluctant to leave Penn State with an incomplete grade in football. Shane Conlan decided that to come so close to being part of the No. 1 team in the country last season, and then pass up a second chance, would be like a student quitting school only a few credits short of earning a degree. What's more, there was a matter of loyalty, no small consideration in this case. He was reluctant to leave Penn State with an incomplete grade in football. Shane Conlan decided that to come so close to being part of the No. 1 team in the country last season, and then pass up a second chance, would be like a student quitting school only a few credits short of earning a degree. What's more, there was a matter of loyalty, no small consideration in this case. Conlan hears the Lion's roar more loudly than most at State College, Pa. The all-America linebacker has always appreciated that Penn State was the only school that actively recruited him five years ago when he was a raw-boned 185-pound defensive back from Frewsburg, N.Y., not a popular stopping point on the recruiting trail. ''I was getting upset at the time because there was no real solid recruitment,'' Conlan said. ''I was amazed that Penn State showed that much interest. They took the time to look, made the effort to watch game films.'' Conlan was red-shirted in his freshman year, 1982, when Penn State finished No. 1 for the first time. It was a year of transition. The coaches liked his aggressiveness, his lean and hungry look. He had the ability to cover a lot of ground. They sent him to the weight room, building him up into a linebacker without sacrificing quickness. Rated With the Best Conlan became one of the best at his position, as good as Oklahoma's Brian Bosworth, Joe Paterno, the Nittany Lions' coach believes, if not as well publicized. Conlan is expected to be a first-round pick in the National Football League draft, the latest in a succession of Penn State linebackers to be coveted by the pros. Conlan could have already been playing in the N.F.L. After Oklahoma spoiled Penn State's bid to finish No. 1 in the Orange Bowl last New Year's night, he was urged by his father, a New York State trooper, to pass up his final year of eligibility since his class was graduating. There appeared to be little to gain by returning to Penn State. ''But falling short last year made me want to come back,'' he said. ''And I'm glad I did.'' There were practical steps to take, however, such as protecting Conlan's potential worth as a professional football player. His parents took out a life insurance policy in their son's name this year, protecting him in case of injury in a high risk sport. Conlan was evasive about the amount of coverage or what it cost, saying he was insured for between $500,000 and $1 million. It cost his parents between $5,000 and $10,000, he said. It might be considered a wise investment. Conlan plays with a recklessness that belies his clean-cut look and polite manners. He has the square-jawed Clark Kent profile, neatly trimmed brown hair and an easy smile. He says he has become friendly with Vinny Testaverde, the Miami quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner, whom Conlan will be chasing on Friday night in the Fiesta Bowl, because they have similiar personalities. They met after being named to an all-America team. ''I've gotten to know Vinny really well,'' Conlan said. ''He's like me, confident, but humble.'' Sometimes Too Aggressive The team psychologist for the San Diego Chargers several years ago once characterized linebackers as having the personalities of assassins. Conlan, who is 6 feet 3 inches and 225 pounds, has disturbed Paterno on occasion because of his penchant for drawing unsportsmanlike penalties for being too aggressive. ''I play better when I'm mad,'' he said. ''I was so mad against Notre Dame, for instance, especially Steve Beuerlein.'' Conlan was angered when the Notre Dame quarterback said it would not be a big upset if his team defeated Penn State. ''I'm not mad at Miami, yet,'' Conlan said. ''But regardless of whether I'm friendly with Testaverde, I want to hit Vinny as hard as I can on Friday. I would feel that way even against my brother or mother.'' It is Penn State's ferocious tackling that worries Jimmy Johnson, the Miami coach. He said his team depends on turning short passing plays into long gains by breaking tackles. Conlan said the Penn State defense brings realistic goals into the game. ''They are going to score,'' he said. ''Testaverde is a seasoned quarterback. It's not like they will put us in a magic defense and we'll sack him 10 times. ''But we have to slow them down, force some turnovers. If that means me moving around more, then fine. I like running around.''  FIESTA BOWL
