128|1987\01\01|INLAND SAYS IT HAS NO DEAL YET|The Inland Steel Company said yesterday that it had not yet reached an agreement with the Nippon Steel Corporation of Japan to establish a joint venture in the United States to make sheet metal for use in automobiles.|The Inland Steel Company said yesterday that it had not yet reached an agreement with the Nippon Steel Corporation of Japan to establish a joint venture in the United States to make sheet metal for use in automobiles. The Inland Steel Company said yesterday that it had not yet reached an agreement with the Nippon Steel Corporation of Japan to establish a joint venture in the United States to make sheet metal for use in automobiles. According to published reports in Japan, the companies had completed negotiations on the construction of a $400 million factory in the Middle West that would begin operating in late 1988, with an annual production capacity of at least a million tons. The reports added that Inland would have a 60 percent stake in the plant, with the balance controlled by Nippon Steel. The venture would be financed partly by the trading companies of Mitsui, Mitsubishi and Nissho Iwai, which would handle the steel sales to Japanese automobile plants, the reports said. An Inland spokesman, Charles A. Nekvasil, said that negotiations were continuing and that ''no deal has been presented to the board of directors.'' The spokesman added that the financing of the deal had not yet been worked out. ''Nothing has been set yet,'' he said. The Inland spokesman said the company was eager to reach an agreement, noting that the two companies had been negotiating for more than two years to build a continuous cold mill facility in this country. The spokesman said the plant would use technology developed by Nippon to produce the kind of smooth, high-quality steel that is eagerly sought by Detroit's auto makers. The spokesman said the plant would be patterned after a similar facility operated by Nippon Steel in Hirohota, Japan. Nippon Steel, the world's largest steel company, has had domestic problems in recent months, a result of a strong yen, slumping exports and low domestic demand. Last week, the company announced that it was closing five of its twelve blast furnaces.
