129|1987\01\01|FIRST CHICAGO TO BUY DELAWARE BANK|Increasing its stake in the credit-card business, the First Chicago Corporation said today that it would buy the Beneficial National Bank in Wilmington, Del., from the Beneficial Corporation for $247 million.|Increasing its stake in the credit-card business, the First Chicago Corporation said today that it would buy the Beneficial National Bank in Wilmington, Del., from the Beneficial Corporation for $247 million. Increasing its stake in the credit-card business, the First Chicago Corporation said today that it would buy the Beneficial National Bank in Wilmington, Del., from the Beneficial Corporation for $247 million. Analysts said the acquisition would make First Chicago, already the nation's fifth-largest issuer of credit cards, a more potent player. Currently, it has $3.4 billion in outstanding balances and three million card holders. Beneficial National, whose primary business is the issuance of Visa and Mastercard credit cards, is the 12th-largest card issuer. The move would also give First Chicago, which is incorporated in Delaware, its first operating unit in that state. 'Growth in a Big Step' ''They can achieve growth in a big step with this acquisition,'' said Ronald I. Mandle, an analyst with Paine Webber Inc., who added that he expected Beneficial to contribute to First Chicago's earnings in ''a couple of years.'' For the Beneficial Corporation, a consumer finance company, the sale would aid in its restructuring. Two weeks ago, the Delaware company said it would sell about $1.4 billion in assets. The announcement came after it was unable to negotiate a takeover agreement with an unidentified corporation, rumored to have been the Transamerica Corporation, for about $1.74 billion. Beneficial said it now plans to concentrate on its consumer lending operations. A spokesman for the company said proceeds from this sale and from the expected sale of its insurance operations would be used to refinance debt and to repurchase shares. Beneficial National is not considered a full service bank - defined as an institution that takes commercial deposits and makes consumer loans. Beneficial officials said the bank takes in commercial deposits, but does not make consumer loans. It only issues credit cards. Of the bank's total assets of $1.1 billion, about $1 billion are receivables on credit-card accounts. Regulatory Approval Expected Bank and industry analysts said they do not expect regulatory problems. Typically, a bank acquisition across state lines requires approval from state and Federal authorities. A spokesman for the Federal Reserve Board, which regulates bank holding companies, said, ''Although we have to look at First Chicago's application, the subject is not without precedent.'' On the state level, the issue is a little more cloudy because the sale is subject to approval by Delaware officials. ''It would be premature to issue any reponse,'' said Susan I. Winters, deputy commissioner in the Office of the State Bank Commisioner of Delaware. First Chicago officials remained confident that they would receive regulatory approval and complete the deal by mid-1987. ''It is a credit-card business, which happens to be imbedded in a bank,'' said Leo F. Mullin, First Chicago's executive vice president of consumer banking.
