130|1987\01\01|1986's CHARITABLE TAX RUSH|A surge in year-end charitable giving has taken place across the United States, as many donors rushed to make their gifts before the new tax law went into effect today.|A surge in year-end charitable giving has taken place across the United States, as many donors rushed to make their gifts before the new tax law went into effect today. A surge in year-end charitable giving has taken place across the United States, as many donors rushed to make their gifts before the new tax law went into effect today. Colleges, universities and religious organizations generally report a marked increase in contributions; less so the arts. Most of the gifts were traditional -cash and securities. But others were unusual, ranging from Persian rugs to cases of wine. Indeed, in one instance, a majority interest in a vineyard was donated. A number of environmental groups also received substantial gifts of property. Many, but not all, of the benefiting organizations said contributors acted to get maximum benefits under the expiring tax code. In 1987, gifts from individuals and corporations to the country's 1 million nonprofit organizations will be subject to the new Tax Reform Act. The law affects charitable giving to educational institutions, libraries, hospitals, museums, religious organizations, welfare agencies and cultural groups. $11 Billion Loss Seen The Independent Sector - the country's largest philanthropic coalition - estimates that, under the new tax law, nonprofit organizations will lose at least $11 billion in charitable contributions annually. However, others dispute that estimate as unduly pessimistic. Many large nonprofit organizations, such as universities, depend on receiving from donors securities that have appreciated in value; the donors in the past have gotten sizable tax write-offs. But under the new law, the appreciated portion of such gifts will be subject to alternative minimum tax treatment for the first time. The coalition estimated this provision alone will mean $1 billion less for nonprofit organizations. Some wealthy donors have been fulfilling two- and three-year pledges ahead of schedule, according to Brian O'Connell, the coalition's president. Consequently, it will be much tougher to come near the same levels of giving in 1987 and 1988, he acknowledged. However, he also argued that although tax policies influence the size of gifts, donors will continue to give ''for all the right reasons.'' Traditionally, the time between Thanksgiving and New Year's is the busiest period for fund-raisers. In recent months, many buttressed their usual appeals by arguing the tax advantages of giving in 1986. Stanley S. Weithorn, a New York lawyer and tax adviser to both nonprofit groups and wealthy donors, also emphasized to clients that the old law applies to any gift mailed before midnight yesterday, even though it may be received by the beneficiary in 1987. 'The Most Generous Month' ''Columbia University is expecting December to be the most generous month in its history in terms of private donations,'' Norman S. Fink, deputy vice president for development and alumni relations, said recently. He estimated that $10 million in gifts would be received for December. The University began a five-year drive in 1982 to raise $500 million. Yale University received more than $11 million in December, more than double the amount of money received from individuals during December 1985. Many of the gifts were appreciated securities, and reflected the donors' interest in acting before the Dec. 31 deadline, according to Sue Dorn, associate vice president for development. Yale also received some nontraditional gifts, one of them 13 cases of wine valued between $30,000 and $40,000. The gift, from Mr. and Mrs. A. Abner Rosen of New York, is to be used - for official purposes - by Yale's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., a provision that insures the donor receives a full tax deduction, which would not be so if the wine was sold or auctioned. In California, Claremont McKenna College reported that the number of donors for 1986 is 46 percent ahead of 1985, even though the total of funds is down 15 percent. This suggests an increase of contributions from smaller non-itemizing taxpayers, who will no longer get a deduction for their charitable gifts under the new tax code, Jon Keates, vice president for development, said. The college has also received some nontraditional gifts, one of them an 80 percent interest in a 122-acre vineyard in the Sonoma Valley, valued, Mr. Keates said, in the ''half-million range.'' Cultural organizations were more cautious in reporting their year-end contributions. 'We've Had Nice Support' ''We've had nice support, not as dramatic as it might have been, but above last year's year-end contributions,'' said Joe McKoughan, vice president for public affairs at Lincoln Center Inc. It is difficult for arts groups to ''try to keep up with our brothers and sisters in the education field, '' said Milton Rhodes, president of the American Council for the Arts. The council's 2,900 members include orchestras, museums, opera and dance companies and theater groups. Philippe de Montebello, director of the Metropolian Museum of Art, said, ''I cannot say there is an unusual surge compared with last year, but it is a good year.'' Albert K. Webster, executive vice president and managing director of the New York Philharmonic, said, ''If the national trend is increased philanthropy, I'm disappointed the world of arts doesn't have a higher priority.'' He added that orchestras are generally ''holding their own, but obviously donors are making choices, and we all know education and religion have high priorities.'' Gifts to religious organizations tend to increase toward the end of the year, and Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York is running about a half-million dollars ahead of 1985, according to Msgr. James J. Murray, executive director. Some of the contributions are made as appreciated securities. ''The tax law has had some influence on the increased contributions, but the giving also reflects people's concern for others, and particularly the more visible homeless,'' he said. A 20 Percent Increase Fund raising for the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies of New York is running about 20 percent ahead of last year's drive, Stephen Solender, executive vice president, said. He stated: ''We expected to achieve this level, and if we had achieved a significantly higher level, it would have confirmed that the new tax law was leading people to give, before Dec. 31, the contributions they would have spread out over future years. Our experience suggests that predictions about the negative impact of the law, which were made four or five months ago, were probably overstated. The New York Public Library is having a ''tremendous'' volume in gifts, according to Vartan Gregorian, its president, but he attributed the increase to the library's five-year fund-raising drive, not the tax law. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center has received more end-of-the-year gifts than in prior years, particularly in the form of appreciated securities, Mortimer H. Chute, vice president for development, said. The center also received two unusual gifts. One was a 117-acre estate in the rolling countryside of Flemington, N.J., valued at $2.9 million, and the other a 17th-century Persian carpet, valued at $175,000. The New York Community Trust, one of the country's wealthiest foundations, opened up a record number of 100 new charitable funds for donors, Herbert B. West, the director, said. He said some were initial gifts to be augmented in future and were made by tax lawyers and investors ''who really know the business.'' 'Heavy Tax Weather' But the altered tax code could mean difficulties for newer community foundations, according to Thomas A.Troyer, a Washington lawyer and consultant to the Council on Foundations. Such foundations depend on gifts of appreciated property. ''The coming year will see heavy tax weather for a range of small community foundations starting up around the country,'' he said. The Nature Conservancy, the land-acquisition arm for the country's environmental movement, is experiencing a ''tremendous increase'' in gifts of appreciated properties and securities, according to John Jensen, vice president for development. He said the contributions undoubtedly were a result of the tax changes. United Way pledges, made mainly through payroll deductions, are not expected to be affected by the tax code change, according to Jack Moskowitz, a senior vice president, estimating that pledges paid out in 1987 would be about 6 to 8 percent above the $2.3 billion received last year.  WHAT THE NEW LAW COULD COST CHARITIES  The three tax changes that affect charitable giving and how much each is estimated to cost charities in 1988. Change Cost Cut in marginal tax rates $4.98 billion Loss of non-itemizer deduction $4.97 billion Appreciated property subject to minimum tax $0.99 billion Total $10.94 billion AND THE AREAS MOST AFFECTED  Areas of charitable giving expected to have biggest losses. Educational and cultural institutions, which depend heavily on high-bracket donors and gifts of appreciated property, are expected to be hardest hit. Charitable Expected Area Loss (%) Education -16.5% Culture -16.5 Social services -15.5 Health care -15.5 Religion -12.9 Other causes -14.3 All areas -14.3% (Source: Independent Sector)
