134|1987\01\01|Hearst Gets Esquire Magazine|Esquire, the monthly that has been one of the magazine industry's greatest turnaround stories in recent years, was bought yesterday by the Hearst Corporation as part of the sale and breakup of Esquire's parent company, the Esquire Magazine Group Inc. Correction: January 7, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition|Esquire, the monthly that has been one of the magazine industry's greatest turnaround stories in recent years, was bought yesterday by the Hearst Corporation as part of the sale and breakup of Esquire's parent company, the Esquire Magazine Group Inc. Esquire, the monthly that has been one of the magazine industry's greatest turnaround stories in recent years, was bought yesterday by the Hearst Corporation as part of the sale and breakup of Esquire's parent company, the Esquire Magazine Group Inc. As part of the overall transaction, the American Express Publishing Corporation bought the Esquire group's six-month-old publication, New York Woman. Whittle Communications of Knoxville, Tenn., acquired its Esquire Health and Fitness Clinic, which publishes a magazine-on-the-wall for health clubs. And the shareholders of the Esquire Magazine Group will continue to own the company's Esquire Press, its book publishing division, and Esquire Video. Phillip Moffitt, editor in chief and president of the Esquire group, said financial terms of the deals would not be made public. He said he would become an editorial consultant to both Hearst and American Express Publishing for an interim period. Rumors that Hearst would buy Esquire magazine had been circulating for several weeks. But it had not been apparent that Mr. Moffitt would almost completely relinquish his involvement in the communications empire that he and his erstwhile partner, Christopher Whittle, had carved out in the last 10 years. Plans to Write In a telephone interview, Mr. Moffitt said he had decided in November to sell the company to devote his efforts to writing full time. ''I've always wanted to write full time,'' he said. ''I felt that I had achieved almost every goal I had set for myself in magazine publishing, but this other thing so nagged at me that it finally reached the point where I said to myself that if I was ever to give myself over to it, I had to do it now.'' Mr. Moffitt said the Esquire group had been pursued for years, but that the sale was expedited to beat the new tax law that takes effect today. All the transactions took effect as of yesterday. All 150 of the Esquire group's employees will continue to work at the New York offices and at regional sales offices in Chicago, Detroit, Chicago and Los Angeles under the new managements. Wilma Jordan, the Esquire group's chief operating officer, will be a consultant to Hearst on Esquire for the next three months. 'Bonus Pool' Set Up Mr. Moffitt said that the corporation's selling shareholders, with their profits from the transactions, had established a ''bonus pool'' of more than $1 million for distribution to all employees who are not shareholders. ''It's just to say thanks for having made Esquire a high-spirited, fun place to work,'' Mr. Moffitt said. Industry analysts noted that Hearst owns several magazines oriented toward male readers, including Popular Mechanics, Boating and Sports Afield, although most of its magazines, including Town & Country, Cosmopolitan and Harper's Bazaar, are aimed at women. Seventy percent of Esquire's readers are men, mainly between the ages of 25 and 44. But the magazine has been seeking a slightly older audience. Ad Pages Decline Esquire estimates that it will carry 1,300 pages of advertising this year, down 7 percent from last year. It has a circulation of 700,000. Esquire was originally owned by the 13-30 Corporation, then headed by Mr. Moffitt and Mr. Whittle. But they split up last April and divided their assets into two separate corporations: Whittle Communications and the Esquire Magazines Group Inc. Whittle Communications has 25 media properties, including single-sponsor publications, newsletters, and ''magazines-on-the-wall,'' which consist of small-scale billboards in schools and offices that are frequently changed. Thomas O. Ryder, president of American Express Publishing, said the purchase of New York Woman fits the company's intention to reach more affluent women in urban areas, which is the publication's target readership. In a separate industry development, Playboy Enterprises Inc. announced that it had sold its Games magazine, which offers puzzles and mind benders, to an investor group that includes the publication's publisher. Jerry Calabrese, Hershel Sarbin, former president of the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, and Victor H. Palmieri, the financier. No terms of the sale were released. COMPANY NEWS  Correction:  January 7, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
