135|1987\01\01|CHAMPAGNE, POMEGRANATES AND OTHER SPLENDORS|Last weekend a small fleet of trucks pulled into Moscow and unloaded an eye-popping cornucopia at the city's winter-bare markets: fat black grapes, ripe persimmons and pomegranates, watermelons and mandarin oranges, tomatoes and cucumbers, smoked chicken and fish.|Last weekend a small fleet of trucks pulled into Moscow and unloaded an eye-popping cornucopia at the city's winter-bare markets: fat black grapes, ripe persimmons and pomegranates, watermelons and mandarin oranges, tomatoes and cucumbers, smoked chicken and fish. Last weekend a small fleet of trucks pulled into Moscow and unloaded an eye-popping cornucopia at the city's winter-bare markets: fat black grapes, ripe persimmons and pomegranates, watermelons and mandarin oranges, tomatoes and cucumbers, smoked chicken and fish. At subway stops around the city, farmers from Georgia, Kirghizia and Uzbekistan peddled exotic pastries for the New Year celebration, or passed steaming skewers of shashlik into the gloved hands of bundled Muscovites. ''Lord,'' muttered a wide-eyed woman surveying an extraordinary array of sausages at the Central Farmers' Market on Tsvetnoi Boulevard. Nearby, a saleswoman battered apart blocks of frozen geese with an ax. Just as Americans know an election is approaching when city services suddenly become more courteous and efficient, so Muscovites sensed that something was afoot. 'Initiative' Is the Byword Sure enough, the official press explained, Moscow was witnessing a splendid demonstration of the newest Soviet economic slogan, ''initiative.'' The three-day glut was organized under a Government decree, issued earlier this year, that allows collective farms to take a part of their produce to market on their own and sell it for whatever prices the traffic will bear. Normally, the average Soviet grocery shopper has two choices. He can buy from the Government shops, where goods are sold at low, fixed prices but where the selection, at least in the dead of winter, is meager. Or he can buy from the collective farmers who offer a greater variety of food grown on their private plots adjoining the collective farms where they work. The farmers often have meats, homemade pickles, and enticing fruit, but at stiff prices. Motivating the Farmer The new directive was designed to give farmers an incentive to get more fruit and vegetables to market from the collective farms themselves -items that might normally rot on the farm because of the Government's inadequate distribution system. Under the new policy, the collective farms are allowed to sell 30 percent of their produce at whatever prices the traffic will bear, and to keep the proceeds for projects on the farm. Getting the additional groceries to the cities, the Government reasons, will shorten lines at Government stores, and provide some competition to drive down the farmers' prices. Moscow tested the system in the fall, in food fairs set up before the Revolution Day holiday on Nov. 7. The event was proclaimed a success, and the fairs were reopened for three days last weekend on a grander scale. Muscovites are also finding it a little easier to fill their glasses this season for holiday toasts. Liquor stores, their hours curtailed as part of the campaign against drunkenness, now stay open an hour later, and Sunday hours have been resumed. For those who can do without wine or vodka, Moscow is awash in champagne. Even as the Government was reporting last week that vodka and wine sales had been curtailed by higher prices and shorter hours, sales of sparkling wine, both Hungarian imports and the sweetish bubbly from domestic factories, have remained constant, 212 million bottles in the first 11 months of 1986. Recently the Government began permitting sales of sparkling wine in grocery stores and fruit juice bars. ''Initiative'' has so far not brought even temporary relief to other consumer items, judging by the grumpy crowds lined up to buy New Year's gifts in department stores. At Detsky Mir, the children's department store, aisles were congested and the mood was anything but festive. The wait for toy trains appeared to be at least two hours, not counting a separate trip to the cashier to pay for it, and a return to claim the purchase. In the cavernous Victorian halls of the GUM department store, by far the biggest draw was a newly arrived supply of blank Sony cassettes. The line snaked 100 yards through the store to purchase the cassettes at $13.50 apiece. The Soviet Union is second in the world in electricity production, but it seems to invest little of that in lighting. This is a city of 60-watt bulbs, dimly lit streets, and drivers who refuse to use their headlights. The New Year's holiday is a glorious exception. Flickering colored lights are affixed to lampposts in the shapes of torches or snowflakes, buildings are outlined in yellow lights, and one of the electronic billboards normally devoted to political slogans now portrays a figure suspiciously like Santa Claus. Not really Santa Claus, of course. During the first 20 years after the 1917 Revolution, the observance of Christmas was abolished, but many of the trappings were transferred to the New Year's holiday. Thus Grandfather Frost, a jolly old soul in a red suit and white beard, somewhat more slender than the American Santa Claus, brings gifts for children on New Year's Eve. Store windows are festooned with tinsel and cardboard snowmen, and New Year's trees are trimmed with plastic balls and edible ornaments. Near Red Square, giant fir trees have been strung with colored lights and tinsel, and topped with a red star that is clearly not intended to represent Bethlehem's. MOSCOW JOURNAL
