140|1987\01\01|Preservation, With a Profit|WALTER BEINECKE JR. gave himself and his family a $50 million Christmas present this year, when he sold a major portion of the town of Nantucket, Mass., to the First Winthrop Corporation.|WALTER BEINECKE JR. gave himself and his family a $50 million Christmas present this year, when he sold a major portion of the town of Nantucket, Mass., to the First Winthrop Corporation. WALTER BEINECKE JR. gave himself and his family a $50 million Christmas present this year, when he sold a major portion of the town of Nantucket, Mass., to the First Winthrop Corporation. Mr. Beinecke had spent the last 25 years redeveloping the town to keep it from self-destructing. Along with his father, Mr. Beinecke had helped organize Nantucket's preservation movement in the 1950's, to save the island's Greek Revival mansions and other landmark buildings. His interest in historic properties eventually led him to the board of the National Trust for Historic Preservation. Beginning in the early 1960's, the partnership he managed, Sherburne Associates, bought up much of the rundown waterfront of the old whaling community on the chip of land 30 miles out in the Atlantic Ocean, then fixed it up, building by building, filling in the holes with 18th-century reproductions. ''If we had taken this beautiful place and allowed the same kind of beachfront motels and pizza parlors that visitors could find on the mainland, there would have been no reason for them to come the 30 miles out here,'' Mr. Beinecke said yesterday. But he was never interested in preservation of historic architecture for preservation's sake. He always intended to make a profit - even if it took him a couple of decades to do it. On Christmas Eve, he sold the holdings of the family partnership -160 buildings, including two hotels, the Nantucket Boat Basin, 36 retail buildings and 40 cottages. The Beinecke partnership had accumulated the properties gradually, renovating them a few at a time. The partners took advantage of tax rules on depreciation and historic preservation to help shelter income from other businesses. ''In the early years, there was no way to justify the investment based on the returns the properties were generating,'' Mr. Beinecke said. ''But we assumed we were building capital value as the years wore on, and as the economy of the island began to revive.'' The revival came slowly. After a century as a whaling port, Nantucket fell into a 100-year depression after a fire burned the town in 1846, Mr. Beinecke said. Then, after World War II, tourists began to find their way to the remote island. ''The question was whether to provide for it in a way that would save what was worth seeing in Nantucket, or just let the growth happen,'' he said. Even after his family had become the largest landholders on the island, Mr. Beinecke often found himself arguing before the local preservation organization for greater restrictions on development. He often contributed money to groups attempting to buy up vacant land to block development. Such a strategy helped make existing properties - including the Beineckes' - more valuable, but it also tended to limit the freedom, and sometimes the income, of shopowners and developers. Mr. Beinecke also used his control of the commercial real estate of the island to moderate the traffic. He refused to allow one ferry boat to land at his marina, the only one on the island, when the ferry operator declined to reduce the number of passengers he was bringing each day. Rents in the shops on the rejuvenated piers soared tenfold, to $6,500 a month, but the customers came and the island's economy boomed. Still, as a real estate company, Sherburne was less than a runaway success. ''It was never a free-standing business,'' Mr. Beinecke said. ''Our principal business was Christmas Club A Corporation, which organized savings clubs for banks. We used the depreciation and other tax-related benefits to offset some of the profits from that business.'' The only way to realize the increased value of the properties was to sell them, but after playing such a large roll in the revival of the town's economy, the Beineckes were reluctant to let go. ''There was a strong element of family pride,'' Mr. Beinecke said. ''We wanted to find someone who would manage them with the same concern as we had for maintaining the standards of design and quality.'' Not until November did First Winthrop learn that the properties might be available. The Beineckes had already gone to contract with another buyer, but then that deal fell through. ''We were prepared to act quickly,'' said Jeffrey D. Furber, an assistant vice president at Winthrop Financial Associates, the umbrella partnership over First Winthrop. ''The Beineckes were eager to complete the sale before the tax rates went up at the end of the year, and we were already acquainted with the properties.'' First Winthrop holds more than $5 billion of real estate around the country and employs 450 people. Among the company's largest holdings are a group of 19 buildings in New York City purchased from the MacArthur Foundation of Chicago in 1984. Those buildings include the Gulf and Western building at Columbus Circle and commercial buildings on Fifth and Park Avenues. After meetings in Boston, New York and Nantucket between Mr. Beinecke and Arthur Halleran Jr., chairman of First Winthrop, the deal was sealed. ''Mr. Beinecke was looking for a buyer who would hold the properties as a group, not sell them off piece by piece to help pay for the acquisition,'' Mr. Furber said. ''That fit our strategy perfectly. Our view is that if you buy and hold real estate that cannot be duplicated, you will eventually make money.'' Buying and holding worked for the Beineckes. Said Mr. Beinecke, ''Whether by the grace of God or inflation, we managed to make a profit in the end.''  TALKING DEALS
