141|1987\01\01|Good Counsel for New York City|When Mayor Koch needed a high-caliber Corporation Counsel for his second administration, he didn't have to look far. F.A.O. Schwarz Jr., a partner in a large law firm, was already deep in public interest litigation, suing the Census Bureau on the city's behalf. It was easy for Mr. Schwarz to apply his impressive energy full time to the city's top legal job.|When Mayor Koch needed a high-caliber Corporation Counsel for his second administration, he didn't have to look far. F.A.O. Schwarz Jr., a partner in a large law firm, was already deep in public interest litigation, suing the Census Bureau on the city's behalf. It was easy for Mr. Schwarz to apply his impressive energy full time to the city's top legal job. When Mayor Koch needed a high-caliber Corporation Counsel for his second administration, he didn't have to look far. F.A.O. Schwarz Jr., a partner in a large law firm, was already deep in public interest litigation, suing the Census Bureau on the city's behalf. It was easy for Mr. Schwarz to apply his impressive energy full time to the city's top legal job. He now returns to private practice, having earned the gratitude of New Yorkers for five years of distinguished service as the city's chief lawyer. That Census lawsuit, still pending, is characteristically creative. It challenges the loss of Federal aid based on a Census known to have undercounted urban minorities. Since taking office, Mr. Schwarz has pressed the Reagan Administration to account for its illegal cuts in disability benefits for New Yorkers on Social Security, an initiative that brought a resounding 9-to-0 Supreme Court victory last year. His aggressive litigation program attracted many bright young lawyers who accepted low wages for the privilege of working with him. Mr. Schwarz met the challenges of his office from potholes to human rights. He worked for fair ways to ease the city's liability for citizen injuries and sought more consistent tax policy toward charitable organizations. He defended hiring programs for minorities and victims of bias against homosexuals, sometimes winning in the Legislature what he couldn't win in court. At a time of widespread panic over acquired immune deficiency syndrome, he helped design and courageously defended in court a sound, humanitarian policy of including AIDS victims in city classrooms. Possibly Mr. Schwarz's best work came in response to the city corruption disclosures of the last year. He saw them as an opportunity to reform a sick political system. While guiding change in city contracting procedures, he kept hammering away at uncontrolled political giving, loose ethics and lobbying laws, the appearance of political favoritism. The City Council could now give proper recognition to his service by enacting his proposal to deny discretionary benefits to anyone who contributes more than $3,000 to city officials. Fritz Schwarz, great-grandson of the toy company founder, served the nation well a decade ago as counsel to the Senate committee investigating intelligence abuses. In New York, he has raised aspirations and performance in city government and made City Hall cleaner and livelier. It's a contribution to be prized, for its content and for its example.
