143|1987\01\01|2 OFFICERS SENT TO BAR HOLDUP, ROBBED OF GUNS|Two police officers responding to a reported robbery at a Brooklyn tavern early yesterday were themselves held up by the robbers, who took their revolvers and herded them into a back room with patrons, the police said.|Two police officers responding to a reported robbery at a Brooklyn tavern early yesterday were themselves held up by the robbers, who took their revolvers and herded them into a back room with patrons, the police said. Two police officers responding to a reported robbery at a Brooklyn tavern early yesterday were themselves held up by the robbers, who took their revolvers and herded them into a back room with patrons, the police said. One officer had a gun put to his neck as soon as he opened the door, while the other was grabbed from behind and forced to the ground before she entered the bar, said Capt. Michael Julian, a police spokesman. The robbers - the police said there were four - took cash, credit cards and jewelry from the the 16 people in the bar and $1,500 from the cash register. They fled in a car. Two Suspects Captured Two suspects were caught an hour later when the police tracked down a license plate on the double-parked getaway car, but two other suspects remained at large, said Police Officer Peter O'Donnell, another spokesman. Captain Julian said there were ''indications some tactical errors were made in the officers' approach to the bar'' that could ''lead to retraining and possibly a reprimand.'' Both officers kept their pistols in their holsters as they walked toward the bar, Captain Julian said. He added that he did not know whether they believed the robbers had already fled. The officers were identified as Frank Lello, 25 years old, who joined the force in July 1983, and Silvia Pacheco, 23, who joined in January 1985. They were treated at St. John's Hospital for shock and released. No injuries to patrons were reported. Captain Julian said the police could not provide statistics on the number of incidents in which officers had lost their guns to assailants. ''It's not the first time, but it is rare,'' he said. Such incidents are thoroughly reviewed, and many are used as a basis for officer training sessions on how to avoid them, he added. Transit Officer Helps The robbery occurred at 1:15 A.M. at the Greenpoint Tavern, 188 Bedford Avenue in the Greenpoint section. The two suspects were quickly arrested because an off-duty transit police officer, initially unaware of the robbery but walking nearby, wrote down the getaway car's license plate number after hearing its driver shout ''Did you get the guns?'' before speeding off. The police used the information to trace the car to the home of one of the suspects, Martin Allen, 36, of 270 Crown Street in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn. The car was registered to his wife, the police said. The second suspect in custody was identified as James Radden, 33, of 829 Beverly Road in the Flatbush section,
