144|1987\01\01|Oh, What the New Year Might Bring|Clark Clifford has watched many a tumultuous year pass in the nation's capital, but even he describes 1986 as an unusually eventful time.|Clark Clifford has watched many a tumultuous year pass in the nation's capital, but even he describes 1986 as an unusually eventful time. Clark Clifford has watched many a tumultuous year pass in the nation's capital, but even he describes 1986 as an unusually eventful time. ''It's a period of ferment and a period of change,'' said Mr. Clifford, an elder statesman of the Democratic Party who has been an adviser to Democratic Presidents from Harry S. Truman on. ''And I think it will stretch into 1987,'' he said. This is a city with its own rhythm, much given to the stately pause - the Congressional recess, for example, or the Presidential vacation. But in recent months, as Mr. Clifford suggests, the capital's rhythm has quickened. And as 1986 tumbled toward 1987, seasoned Washingtonians had the sense that history was moving fast. The holidays seemed truncated, perhaps because the weeks leading up to them were filled with news of Congressional hearings on the Reagan Administration's secret arms sales to Iran and the appointment of a special prosecutor. And as the capital looked ahead, the new year seemed likely, to many, to maintain the old year's dizzying pace. In the first week of 1987, President Reagan will have prostate surgery. The 100th Congress will convene, with Democrats in control of both houses and with one of the first items of business the formal start-up of two special committees named to investigate the Iran arms deal. Both national party chairmen predict that the 1988 Presidential campaign will soon begin to escalate. The Republicans will choose a convention site in January, the Democrats not long afterward. The Republican chairman, Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., said it seemed he had just finished wrapping up the 1984 convention in Dallas. There is, indeed, a breathless quality to it all. But Washingtonians still found a little time on New Year's Eve to take stock, to look back and ahead, to voice a few resolutions, predictions and dreams. Mr. Fahrenkopf took heart this week when he scanned the front page of a major newspaper and discovered not a single article on Iran. He is hopeful, albeit cautiously so, that the uproar may have reached its peak. ''Unless there's something we don't know about, I don't think it will be as high a profile,'' the party chairman said as he looked ahead to 1987. The past few months have been difficult for the Republicans. First they lost control of the Senate, then they watched Mr. Reagan become mired in controversy over the Iran arms deal and the diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan rebels. ''We didn't even get a chance to catch our breath after the election and the Iran thing hit,'' Mr. Fahrenkopf said. ''And that was like a snowball going downhill, it went so fast.'' Mr. Fahrenkopf's New Year's resolution is to pick up two more governorships in 1987, which would give the Republicans a majority of the governors' seats. He dismisses, out of hand, the notion that the ''Reagan era'' is ending, as many Democrats have euphorically declared. ''So long as he's in that White House, he will never be a lame duck, in my view,'' Mr. Fahrenkopf said. ''He'll always be a tremendous force.'' Over the holidays, the Republican chairman said he went into his office and read some of the mail from party loyalists around the country. It was mostly Christmas cards - ''give our best to the President and First Lady'' - and Mr. Fahrenkopf said it was a wonderful lift to his mood. He did, indeed, sound enthusiastic as he viewed the approaching year. On Capitol Hill, the end of the old year and the dawn of the new were being marked by that ancient ritual of legislative bodies: the shuffling of office space. Perhaps one of the most evocative signs of change on Capitol Hill occurred when the House Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who is retiring after three decades in Congress, moved out of his offices this month. ''He's going to be greatly missed,'' said Paul G. Kirk Jr., chairman of the Democratic National Committee. A flurry of other moving has been going on, what with the retiring and the defeated, the returning and the new, and much shuffling of staff. One of the hottest jobs of the new year will be on the staff of the special committees formed to conduct the Iran-Nicaragua investigations. ''We have received lots of applications, and I mean lots,'' said a spokesman for Senator Daniel K. Inouye, who will head the Senate panel. Mr. Kirk was closing out 1986 in good spirits. He was not complacent - Democratic leaders warn constantly of the danger of complacency regarding the Republicans' troubles over the Iran affair - but he was certainly in a confident frame of mind. ''I thought it would be a year of reckoning for the Republicans,'' the Democratic chairman said as he looked back on 1986. After his party's landslide Presidential defeat in 1984, ''It was kind of fashionable to beat up on the Democrats,'' Mr. Kirk said. He believes that in 1986, the Democratic Party regained its psychological edge and shattered the thesis that the electorate was undergoing a fundamental change in party allegiance. ''I never really bought into the so-called realignment,'' the party chairman said. In 1987, Mr. Kirk argues, the Democrats will have a great opportunity: to focus on the future, while the Republicans must defend the past, including the Iran controversy. He looked toward 1987 with the buoyance common among Democrats since the returns were tallied on Nov. 4. WASHINGTON TALK
