147|1987\01\01|PARCELLS CREDITS HIS PLAYERS|Random thoughts from Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants:|Random thoughts from Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants: Random thoughts from Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants: On his selection by The Associated Press today as the National Football League's coach of the year: ''I coach a lot better when I have good players.'' On why the Giants have improved this year: ''We've got a lot better players.'' On inheriting some good players when he became head coach in 1983: ''Not many of them are left.'' On inheriting some of the good ones who are still here, such as Lawrence Taylor, Harry Carson and George Martin: ''Those guys were good already.'' On Mike Ditka, the volatile coach of the Chicago Bears: ''You're darn right I like him. I judge a coach by what he gets his guys to do. He gets them to do a lot. Being a good coach doesn't have anything to do with winning or losing. Unfortunately, you're judged by winning all the time. I don't think it was like that years ago.'' On why the Giants are practicing here for Sunday's playoff game here against the San Francisco 49ers, rather than moving to a southern training base as the Bears and the Cleveland Browns did: ''If you're going to play in the Atlantic, you're going to practice in the Atlantic. If we were going to play in a warm city, we probably would have gone there.'' On his weather preference for Sunday: ''The defensive guys would like a blizzard. The offensive guys would like 45 degrees and no wind. I've got to go on both sides. I'd like it to be snowing when they've got the ball and nice when we have it.'' On his key personnel move this year: ''If there was any one, it would be Raul Allegre. Getting a kicker like that made a definite difference, especially when it's 10 seconds to go and you win the game. We had a couple of those this year. You miss those and you have the hearses out.'' On which teams made the National Conference playoffs and which did not: ''I thought Minnesota was going to make it, not that they're better than the teams in it. In preseason, I thought Dallas, based on its track record, probably would be involved. And once Atlanta was 5-1, I thought they could make it if they played .500 the rest of the way.'' On the Giants' 21-point third quarter that beat the 49ers, 21-17, four weeks ago: ''We put together some big plays. I've seen the 49ers do that, too, like the second quarter of that game. Those guys moving the chains were getting tired.'' Three 49ers are listed as questionable for Sunday's game - Michael Carter, the starting nose tackle, with an injured left ankle; John Ayers, a starting offensive guard, with an injured left knee, and Mike Durrette, a backup guard, with a lower-back problem. Jeff Stover, a starting defensive end, is listed as probable with an injured left ankle, and he and Carter will probably not play full time. Ayers is an excellent pass blocker, and in past games between the Giants and the 49ers he often neutralized Taylor's pass rush. This time, Guy McIntyre, who blocks better against the run than the pass, will start for him. Carter and Stover are having seasons that would worry Blue Cross. Carter has endured, in succession, a concussion, a sprained left ankle, a sprained right ankle, a sprained right wrist and a reinjured left ankle. Stover's ailments have traveled from right knee to left shoulder to left ankle. However, Carter and Stover have missed only one game each. N.F.L. playoff games, like the heavyweight championship fights of old, attract celebrities. Andy Rooney, Telly Savalas and Walter Cronkite will have no problem seeing the Giants-49ers game because they own season tickets. Don Ameche, Shelley Winters, Postmaster General Robert Tisch and Senator Alfonse D'Amato telephoned the Giants to buy tickets and got them. Governor Cuomo, who has said the Buffalo Bills are New York's only pro football team, asked to buy four tickets and got them. So far, the Giants have not received a call from Mayor Koch, who has said that if the Giants or the Jets win the Super Bowl they should have a parade in New Jersey, where they play, rather than up Broadway. ''I don't think we will hear from him,'' said one Giant official. GIANTS NOTEBOOK
