148|1987\01\01|REAGAN TO PROPOSE A COMPROMISE ON SPENDING FOR WATER TREATMENT|President Reagan, in a dramatic shift aimed at compromise with a Congress already preparing to defy him on the issue, is doubling his proposal for Federal spending on water treatment facilities, Administration officials said today.|President Reagan, in a dramatic shift aimed at compromise with a Congress already preparing to defy him on the issue, is doubling his proposal for Federal spending on water treatment facilities, Administration officials said today. President Reagan, in a dramatic shift aimed at compromise with a Congress already preparing to defy him on the issue, is doubling his proposal for Federal spending on water treatment facilities, Administration officials said today. The President will propose that $12 billion be spent over eight years on Federal grants and loans under the Clean Water Act to help communities build sewage treatment facilities, Lee M. Thomas, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said in confirming the reports of other sources. In his previous budget the President asked for $6 billion for the clean water program. Congress unanimously voted in October for legislation to provide $18 billion for sewage treatment facilities. But after Congress adjourned and could not attempt to override a regular veto, the President said he would not sign the bill. In announcing this pocket veto, Mr. Reagan said he was committed to the clean water law but added, ''Unfortunately, this bill so far exceeds acceptable levels of intended budgetry commitments that I must withhold my approval.'' Proposal Part of Budget His new proposal will come Monday in his budget for the fiscal year 1988, which under the budget law is supposed to have a deficit of no more than $108 billion. But a factor that could make it more difficult to reach that target is new estimates from the Congressional Budget Office today that the cost of Government benefit programs was increasing much faster than had been expected.  [ Page 8. ]  The version of the water program Mr. Reagan will propose would reduce the spending level Congress approved without changing the substantive revisions in the law that were made. Because the bill had been passed unanimously and had been strongly supported by business, labor, environmental and state and local government groups, most experts said that a written veto would have been easily overridden. They also said the same legislation would pass easily again in the 100th Congress. 'Strong Alternative' Is Seen The Administration will now seek to have its own legislation introduced, providing what Mr. Thomas called a ''strong alternative'' to the bill Congress passed. ''The President was looking for a compromise, recognizing where Congress was coming from last year and where it is going this year,'' Mr. Thomas explained. Another Administration official, who did not want to be quoted by name, said that the President's proposal ''is a last-gasp effort to get some moderation in that terribly expensive water bill.'' But the new chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, Quentin N. Burdick of North Dakota, announced today that a clean water bill identical with the one passed last year would be the first bill introduced in the Senate as the 100th Congress begins. House to Act Quickly The House is also scheduled to take up the same legislation as its first order of business. The bill may go to the floor of both chambers as early as the first week of the new session, according to staff aides on Capitol Hill. By all accounts, the legislation continues to enjoy strong bipartisan support in both Houses; it already has 58 cosponsors in the Senate. ''We intend to push this bill through the Congress and back onto the President's desk as soon as possible,'' Senator Burdick, a Democrat, said today. ''If President Reagan chooses to veto this bill, as he did its predecessor, I will lead the effort to override the veto.'' Mr. Thomas said that the Administration's water bill would gradually eliminate the sewage treatment grants over eight years, as Congress wanted, instead of over four years as the President proposed last year. He said that the proposed bill would give states more flexibility in deciding whether they wanted to use the Federal money for outright grants to municipalities or to set up loan programs, but otherwise it left last fall's Congressional legislation unchanged. Among the new provisions added to the clean water law by Congress last October was a provision requiring controls on runoff from urban streets and farms, which are serious sources of water pollution not addressed by existing law. Another new program would have required special efforts to clean up concentrations of hazardous chemicals in bodies of water. The amendments passed by Congress would give new authority to the E.P.A. to prosecute and penalize violators of the law. Critic Says It's Too Late The Clean Water Act, originally passed in 1971, was intended to prevent the discharge of pollutants into the nation's waterways and to make its rivers, lakes and streams ''swimmable and fishable.'' Mr. Thomas said he had not talked to members of Congress about the Administration proposal and did not know how it would be received. ''But this is a strong alternative and one that will fly on its merits,'' he said. Daniel Weiss, a Washington representative for the Sierra Club, a national environmental group, said that for the Administration to propose its own water legislation now was ''trying to close the barn door after the cows have gone.'' A year ago, he said, a compromise effort might have had a chance. ''But this is too little and too late,'' he contended.
