149|1987\01\01|GORBACHEV TELLS SOVIET ON NEW YEAR A THREAT OF WAR PERSISTS|As Mikhail S. Gorbachev delivered a televised New Year's address to the Soviet Union, President Reagan's radio speech could be heard over the Voice of America early today on short-wave radios in spite of some jamming.|As Mikhail S. Gorbachev delivered a televised New Year's address to the Soviet Union, President Reagan's radio speech could be heard over the Voice of America early today on short-wave radios in spite of some jamming. As Mikhail S. Gorbachev delivered a televised New Year's address to the Soviet Union, President Reagan's radio speech could be heard over the Voice of America early today on short-wave radios in spite of some jamming. According to American diplomats who monitored Mr. Reagan's broadcast here, it was audible on most of the frequencies used by Russian-language broadcasts of the Voice of America. One diplomat said that on at least two frequencies the broadcast could be easily understood. On other frequencies, the speech was drowned by static. Listeners in Leningrad reportedly received the President's message clearly. Mr. Reagan decided to beam his message to the Soviet Union by radio over the Voice of America after the Soviet Union rejected a White House proposal for an exchange of televised New Year's messages between Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev. Soviet spokesmen said such an exchange would be inappropriate in light of what they described as a poor state of relations between the two countries, notably over the issue of arms control. Last year Mr. Reagan appeared on Soviet television, and Mr. Gorbachev spoke on television in the United States. In his speech today, Mr. Reagan painted an optimistic picture of progress on arms control and other aspects of Soviet-American relations. In contrast, Mr. Gorbachev, in a message to the American people handed to Joseph Kingsbury-Smith, national editor of the Hearst Newspapers, expressed disappointment over the arms control negotiations. Mr. Gorbachev said: ''People in Washington should finally decide in utter clarity what they want: a runaway arms race or a reduction and elimination of weapons.'' In his New Year's speech to the Soviet people, Mr. Gorbachev said: ''Good wishes alone are now not enough. Good deeds are also needed. Never before has the earth, our home, been subjected to such a danger. There are too many stockpiled weapons in it. These stockpiles should not be allowed to grow further, a catastrophe should not be allowed to happen.'' Deadlock on Arms Control Arms control talks in Geneva have been deadlocked since Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev agreed informally in Iceland in October on a 50 percent cut in all strategic nuclear forces over the next five years and on drastic reductions of Soviet and American medium-range missiles in Europe. A formal agreement in Iceland collapsed because the two men could not agree on a formula for limiting the development of space-based missile defenses. In the New Year's speech to the Soviet people today, Mr. Gorbachev also criticized the American refusal to join the Soviet Union in a halt of nuclear testing and the American decision to stop adhering informally to the strategic arms limitation treaty of 1979. ''Deliberately and pointedly wrecking old treaties does not help the conduct of successful talks on new agreements,'' Mr. Gorbachev said. Most of his speech was devoted to what he called an encouraging start on efforts to revitalize the economy. He said the prospects engendered by the Iceland summit meeting had been set back by ''old conservative thinking'' by Western politicians. On domestic matters, he said the Soviet Union had ''laid the beginning for a comprehensive renewal of our society'' through greater openness in the press and in the arts as well as through economic change. But he warned that ''the forces of stagnation and complacency are still making themselves felt, some people still hope that everything will return to the old beaten track.'' ----Citizens Have Exchange In a live, four-hour radio program broadcast yesterday by radio stations in the United States and the Soviet Union, citizens of the two nations wished one another ''Happy New Year'' and the Russian equivalent, ''S novym godom.'' The program made no mention of the Soviet Union's rejection of an exchange of televised New Year's greetings between President Reagan and the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Poets, children, singers, and classical, jazz and rock musicians from both countries performed and chatted. At one point, two cooks in New York and Moscow swapped recipes for New Year's specialties. The program was broadcast in New York over WBAI radio starting at 7 A.M. and over the Soviet radio network at 3 P.M. Moscow time. It included live broadcasts from other cities in both countries. The program, a joint production of the two radio stations, was part of a peace vigil that began worldwide at noon Greenwich time in London (7 A.M. Eastern Standard time).
