151|1987\01\01|U.S. TRADE DEFICIT HITS $19.2 BILLION, A MONTHLY RECORD|The nation's trade deficit soared to a record $19.2 billion in November, a startling setback following three months of improvement, the Commerce Department reported today.|The nation's trade deficit soared to a record $19.2 billion in November, a startling setback following three months of improvement, the Commerce Department reported today. The nation's trade deficit soared to a record $19.2 billion in November, a startling setback following three months of improvement, the Commerce Department reported today. The gloomy figures put the United States on track for an estimated 1986 trade deficit of $173.6 billion, which would be $25 billion more than 1985's record shortfall. Special factors, including a small fee imposed Dec. 1 on most imported goods and rising calls for protectionist legislation, were responsible for a significant portion of the deterioration, as exporting countries and American importers accelerated the shipment of goods to this country. Private analysts expressed keen disappointment with the November figures, which Robert Ortner, the Commerce Department's top economist, termed ''horrendous.'' Data 'Raise Questions' The latest data ''raise questions about whether the trade accounts have turned around, as seemed to be the case by earlier figures,'' Stuart A. Schweitzer, a vice president at the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, said. The figures also prompted predictions that Congress, with both chambers about to be controlled by the Democrats, would intensify its efforts to restrict imports. In the currency markets, the Commerce Department report caused a selloff of the dollar, sending it to new six-year lows against the West Germany mark and other European currencies. As the dollar became less attractive, gold lured many buyers in holiday-shortened trading, surging above $400 an ounce.  [ Page 51. ]  Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, the new majority leader, seized the occasion to declare: ''The Administration has pretended that we have no trade crisis and that our trade problems will take care of themselves. With today's news, the Administration should make a New Year's resolution to work with Congress to enact comprehensive trade and competitiveness legislation that will restore jobs and halt the erosion of our industrial base.'' Deficit With Japan Surges Among the dispiriting figures in today's report was a 35 percent jump, to $6.74 billion, in the trade deficit with Japan, the biggest one-month excess of imports over exports ever recorded with any country. Meanwhile, the deficit with Western Europe nearly tripled, and that with the developing world jumped nearly 40 percent. The bulk of the new deterioration in the American trade position last month was accounted for by a 20.5 percent jump in imports, to a record $37.8 billion. ''It continues to be more attractive to import than to use U.S. goods and services,'' Steve H. Hanke, a professor of economics at Johns Hopkins University, said. ''We haven't yet turned the corner.'' Largely because of the dollar's decline against the Japanese yen, West German mark and other major currencies over the last two years, economists have predicted that the trade deficit was bound to improve, as imported goods became more costly to Americans and American goods became more attractively priced abroad. In October, when exports posted a hefty increase and growth of imports appeared to have subsided, many suggested that the long-awaited narrowing of the trade gap had finally begun. New Doubt But today's report cast doubt on this. It also gave fresh ammunition to the argument that too little attention had been paid to the fact that the dollar has not fallen much, if at all, against the currencies of such major trading partners as Canada and Mexico, and such increasingly important Far East exporters as Taiwan, South Korea and Hong Kong. American exports, meanwhile, fell 3.8 percent, to a total of $18.6 billion. November thus was only the second month - the first was July - in which imports outpaced exports by a 2-to-1 ratio. The November report also pushed the deficit for the first 11 months of the year to $159.1 billion, eclipsing 1985's record $148.5 billion. The existence of several special factors in the November report, however, served to dispel at least some of the general gloom. An important factor in spurring imports, it was widely agreed, was the imposition on Dec. 1 of a 22-cent-per-$100 levy on all imported goods, except those from the Caribbean. Analysts also speculated that the increasing talk of protectionist legislation - fanned by the takeover of the Senate by the Democrats in the Nov. 4 elections - may have inspired efforts to import as much as possible before further possible restrictions. It also seemed likely, analysts said, that the new 1986 tax law acted to raise imports in November. Imports of foreign automobiles, for example, climbed about $1 billion, as dealers apparently rebuilt inventories depleted when consumers rushed to buy new cars while they could still deduct sales taxes. Depreciation Schedules Deliveries of some business equipment were also thought to have been stepped up to take advantage of favorable depreciation schedules. Imports of steel were also higher, according to Commerce Under Secretary Bruce Smart, because of a strike at the USX Corporation and because this was a final opportunity for foreigners to get in under 1986 quotas. Mr. Smart said, moreover, that nearly 40 percent of the $7.2 billion increase in the November deficit reflected an exceptionally big ''catch-up'' in the processing of shipments actually made in preceding months. The American bill for imported oil rose to $3 billion last month, from $2.7 billion in October, reflecting a 9.3 percent rise in volume and a per-barrel price increase of 19 cents. Agricultural commodities posted their fourth consecutive trade surplus, $484 million, after slipping into deficit earlier this year for the first time since the early 1970's. The record deficit with Japan reflected a sharp increase in imports -to $8.7 billion, from $7.3 billion - and a decline in exports, to $1.99 billion, from $2.28 billion. $1.76 Billion With Taiwan The deficit with Taiwan, $1.76 billion, was larger than that with any European country, and the deficits with South Korea and Hong Kong, both just under $825 million, were bigger than any European country except West Germany. The deficit with Canada soared to $2.8 billion last month, from $1.6 billion, the department reported.
