152|1987\01\01|U.S. AIDE DEFENDS DELAY ON IRAN-CONTRA FINDING|A senior Justice Department official said today that a document that is believed to have disclosed the first link between Iranian arms shipments and support for Nicaraguan rebels contained no obvious indication that a crime had been committed.|A senior Justice Department official said today that a document that is believed to have disclosed the first link between Iranian arms shipments and support for Nicaraguan rebels contained no obvious indication that a crime had been committed. A senior Justice Department official said today that a document that is believed to have disclosed the first link between Iranian arms shipments and support for Nicaraguan rebels contained no obvious indication that a crime had been committed. The official, Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds, said the document revealed nothing that ''jumped off the page that suggested a criminal violation.'' He said he discovered the document in late November, in a preliminary investigation of the Iran arms sale. Although declining to discuss its contents, Mr. Reynolds said in an interview that he and Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d were ''surprised'' when they found the document and learned of a link between arms sales to Iran and support for the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras. 'A Leap of Faith' But he said it was unfair ''to assume that because money went to the contras that there was a criminal violation - that would be a leap of faith.'' Mr. Reynolds's comments were significant because they appeared to explain why the Justice Department did not move more quickly to call the Federal Bureau of Investigation into the case. According to his account, there was no immediate need for the F.B.I. or criminal prosecutors because there was no clear sign of criminality. Mr. Reynolds also offered an extended defense of the department's handling of the Iran inquiry. ''I keep asking myself what it is we could have done differently,'' he said. ''I have yet to see where we misstepped.'' According to the department, the F.B.I. was called into the case three days after Mr. Reynolds discovered the document in White House files. Legislators have criticized the department for the delay, saying it might have allowed White House aides time to destroy documents sensitive to the case. A Draft Directive According to Government officials, the document was a draft national security directive suggesting the need to raise $12 million for the contras from the Iran arms sale. The author, the officials said, is believed to have been Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, a former National Security Council aide. The Justice Department has said that it took three days to gather sufficient evidence, through interviews and a review of documents, to show that a criminal investigation was needed. Mr. Reynolds, who oversees the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department and is one of Mr. Meese's closest advisers, was part of a small team of lawyers who uncovered the diversion of the Iran payments during a fact-finding inquiry into the arms sale. Asked about reports that documents had been destroyed by Colonel North and other White House officials in late November, Mr. Reynolds said he had no knowledge that any material had been destroyed. In the November investigation, the Justice Department team interviewed Colonel North and the former White House national security adviser, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter. The Justice Department has said that Mr. Reynolds found the critical document on Nov. 22, a Saturday. On the following Tuesday, the department's criminal prosecutors and F.B.I. agents were brought into the case. Mr. Reynolds said it was appropriate not to involve the criminal prosecutors in the initial stages of the inquiry. 'Host of Investigatory Problems' ''It was felt, and I think quite properly, that it would have been a mistake to have brought in criminal investigators at a time well before anybody had any inkling of any kind of criminal culpability,'' he said. ''You've got a whole host of investigatory problems that attach once you launch a criminal investigation,'' he said. ''Certain things have to be done in particular ways. Certain people have to be approached in particlar ways.'' ''I would venture to guess that if we had undertaken to launch a criminal investigation then, which I think would have been very premature, we would never have collected the kind of information we were able to gather by an informal fact-gathering activity,'' Mr. Reynolds said. He said the Chief of the Criminal Division, William Weld, and Mr. Weld's supervisor, Associate Attorney General Stephen S. Trott, had agreed with the handling of the case. INQUIRY ON CONTRAS IS BEGUN WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 (AP) -House investigators have begun another inquiry into allegations that Nicaraguan rebels and their United States supporters were involved in drug trafficking and gun-running, the head of a Congressional crime panel said today. Mr. Hughes said his investigators, who have already done field work in Miami, were looking at ''allegations that have surfaced relative to narcotics trafficking and gun-running'' in Central America.
