153|1987\01\01|TASTY MENU FOR FOOTBALL FANS|New Year's Day is one of the days that make college football fans feel like mosquitos in a nudist camp -they don't know where to begin.|New Year's Day is one of the days that make college football fans feel like mosquitos in a nudist camp -they don't know where to begin. New Year's Day is one of the days that make college football fans feel like mosquitos in a nudist camp -they don't know where to begin. The majority will begin with the Florida Citrus and end with the Orange. In between, the Cotton, the Sugar and the Rose Bowls will fill television screens across the nation. So, pull up a chair: FLORIDA CITRUS Auburn (9-2) vs. Southern Cal (7-4). Noon E.S.T., Orlando, Fla., ABC-TV.  Southern California is the only one of the bowl teams that is not ranked among the Top 20. As a result, the Trojans are the underdogs against the nation's fourth-best scoring team. The Trojans will also be facing the second stingiest team in the country as Auburn gave up only 10.5 points a game, topped only by Oklahoma's 6.6 points per game. Southern California has been noted for its distinguished running backs in the past, names like O. J. Simpson, Charles White and Marcus Allen. But this season's leading rusher for the Trojans is Ryan Knight with 550 yards. As a result, this game will most likely be a match of a running Auburn team, led by Brent Fullwood, the nation's fourth-leading rusher, against the passing Trojans. Fullwood averaged 126 yards a game, while Rodney Peete, the quarterback for the Trojans, threw for 2,025 yards and 10 touchdowns. COTTON BOWL Texas A & M (9-2) vs. Ohio St. (9-3). 1:30 P.M. E.S.T., Dallas, CBS-TV. Ohio State makes the Big Ten Conference's debut in the Cotton Bowl, while Texas A & M seeks to become only the second school in the bowl's history to win it in consecutive years. The eighth-ranked Aggies, who defeated Auburn, 36-16, last New Year's Day, want to match Texas's back-to-back Cotton Bowl championships in 1969-1970. This may be a better Texas A & M team than the one that defeated Auburn last year. Coach Jackie Sherrill, who turned things around for the Aggies in five seasons, has the third-best offensive and the fourth-best defensive team in the nation. Only Oklahoma, first in total defense and second in total offense, has a better combination. Coach Earle Bruce of the Buckeyes is the subject of speculation each year that he is in his last season with the team, but Bruce has led the Buckeyes to a bowl game in each of his eight seasons as coach. They have gone to nine different Bowl games in the last 11 years. They lost to Alabama and Washington to start the season and fell to Michigan in the last game. SUGAR BOWL L.S.U. (9-2) vs. Nebraska (9-2). 3:30 P.M. E.S.T., New Orleans, ABC-TV. The two teams will meet for the second time in three years in the Sugar Bowl, with Nebraska winning in 1985. This will mark the end of Bill Arnsparger's short coaching career at L.S.U. as he leavs to become athletic director at Florida. Louisiana State has a fair running attack, but the Tigers will be going against the second-best defensive team in the nation. Danny Noonan, the all-America middle guard from Nebraska, is the player L.S.U. must prevent from causing havoc in its backfield. With Tom Hogson, a red-shirted freshman, throwing, Wendell Davis, a junior split end, is the primary offensive threat for the Tigers. Hogson threw for 2,261 yards and 19 touchdowns, with Davis catching 80 passes for 1,244 yards and 11 touchdowns. Coach Tom Osborne of Nebraska has, as always, a fine I-back, or tailback, in Keith Jones, who gained 830 yards during the season. Steve Taylor has also become a solid quarterback for the Cornhuskers. He passed for 808 yards and ran for another 537, accounting for 15 touchdowns. ORANGE BOWL Oklahoma (10-1) vs. Arkansas (9-2). 8:30 P.M. E.S.T., Miami, NBC-TV. The declaration that Brian Bosworth, the all-America linebacker from Oklahoma, could not play because he tested positive for steroid use created the most publicity and also diminished Oklahoma's position as the heavy favorite. Bosworth's loss has put a lot of pressure on his replacement, Dante Jones. ''If I miss a tackle or something, I know some people will be saying Brian would have made that one, '' Jones said. ''I guess it's good in a way, though. It'll make me play harder.'' Arkansas also lost a starting linebacker, David Dudley, because of steroids, thus putting each team minus a key player in their most important game of the season. Since both teams employ the wishbone, the linebackers are particularly important in this game for stopping any ground attack and the options from the wishbone.
