154|1987\01\01|MERRILL, I.B.M. END VENTURE|The International Business Machines Corporation and Merrill Lynch & Company said yesterday that they would end their once-promising venture in computerizing the financial services industry. Correction: January 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition|The International Business Machines Corporation and Merrill Lynch & Company said yesterday that they would end their once-promising venture in computerizing the financial services industry. The International Business Machines Corporation and Merrill Lynch & Company said yesterday that they would end their once-promising venture in computerizing the financial services industry. They said the action followed a ''reassessment'' of the financial feasibility of the venture, called International Marketnet. The failure appeared to be a setback for both companies, which had staked millions of dollars on the highly publicized project. Over the last two and a half years, executives of the venture - commonly known as Imnet - had predicted that the combination of I.B.M., with its technical prowess, and Merrill Lynch, with its understanding of the needs of brokers and investors, could leap ahead of competitors like Quotron Systems Inc., now a subsidiary of Citicorp. Termination Is Sudden Two years ago, Joseph P. Castellano, the head of the Imnet venture, said, ''In five or six years we think the market for Marketnet could be as big as $1 billion.'' But yesterday Imnet's 267 staff members were called to a meeting to learn of the sudden termination. Top executives of the venture left its financial district headquarters, and company spokesmen said they would be unavailable. Nor would executives of Merrill Lynch and I.B.M. comment, and efforts to reach Mr. Castellano at home were unsuccessful. In the last 24 months, Imnet discovered that few brokerages other than Merrill Lynch were willing to pay the steep price for the company's services, which combine analytical software and data bases accessible by satellite from central computers. ''It cost too much, and the market just evaporated,'' one midlevel official of the venture said yesterday. ''Starting about the middle of this year, it became clear the whole idea was a disaster.'' I.B.M. and Merrill Lynch announced the end of the project in a four-sentence release. Both companies said the decision had been made ''at the highest levels'' of both companies - presumably meaning it was approved by John F. Akers, I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive, and William Schreyer, who holds the same title at Merrill Lynch. The companies said the decision to close Imnet would have no significant effect on earnings for 1986 or 1987. Many Others Have Failed With yesterday's announcement, Imnet joins a long list of home and office information services that have failed in recent years. Last month, CBS Inc. pulled out of Trintex, a failing videotex venture with I.B.M. and Sears that was established at about the same time as Imnet. In March, Knight-Ridder Inc., the newspaper publisher, abandoned its $50 million videotex effort, intended to bring news, stock prices and shopping information to home computers. The Times Mirror Company and the Centel Corporation also abandoned their offerings in southern California and Chicago. But Imnet was developed for a sophisticated audience - financial professionals - and was intended to do much more than provide information. With Merrill's own 500 branch offices as the first customers, the system was considered a serious competitor of Quotron - whose stock value plunged nearly 30 percent when I.B.M. and Merrill first announced their plans. A Promising Start The venture seemed extremely promising at first. I.B.M. was contributing its computer technology, using a variant of its personal computer as the vehicle for both distributing information to brokers and allowing them to analyze portfolios and assess the future of equities. At the same time, Merrill was focusing on the software and marketing, providing brokers in remote offices with instant access to its research reports and up-to-date recommendations for purchases and sales. The plan was that brokers could eventually trade over the system, which would be connected by satellite to Merrill's central computers. But the only product that Imnet installed in volume was System 100, a program for analysis of equities that was never hooked to the Imnet network. A sophisticated portfolio-management system - intended for Merrill's offices and marketing to other brokerages - was being tested at the time the project was abandoned. Market Misjudged But if the Imnet system was far more sophisticated than home offerings, it appeared to fail for the same reason they did: A misjudgment about how many customers would be willing to pay the price for the added information. ''The marketplace had not developed as we anticipated,'' said Traug Keller, Imnet's director of communications. ''As we began to install the system, we thought we would find a much more sympathetic marketplace. But to get wide acceptance, the pricing structure had to change dramatically - and that shrinks the margin.'' Another Imnet official said a recent review of a study, started at I.B.M.'s instigation, had concluded that ''the project would not be profitable for a long, long time, and might never be profitable at all.'' The cancellation also appears to end a joint effort of Imnet and the Public Broadcasting System, which announced two years ago that it would send stock quotations and financial news to home subscribers over an unused portion of its television signal. PBS officials, who had hoped the system would bring millions of dollars to the nonprofit broadcaster, were unavailable for comment. Correction:  January 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
