160|1987\01\01|CUOMO PLANS TRIPS TO FIVE STATES EARLY IN '87 AND MORE LATER|Governor Cuomo, widely regarded as a possible Presidential candidate in 1988, said today that within the next few months he would travel to Iowa, Florida, Louisiana, California and North Carolina and that ''there will be more'' national trips by mid-1987.|Governor Cuomo, widely regarded as a possible Presidential candidate in 1988, said today that within the next few months he would travel to Iowa, Florida, Louisiana, California and North Carolina and that ''there will be more'' national trips by mid-1987. Governor Cuomo, widely regarded as a possible Presidential candidate in 1988, said today that within the next few months he would travel to Iowa, Florida, Louisiana, California and North Carolina and that ''there will be more'' national trips by mid-1987. The Governor, who has repeatedly said he is not running for President, denied that the trips were linked to a race for the White House. But many national Democratic figures, who have told Mr. Cuomo he must send a signal of his intentions by early 1987 if he is to have any chance of winning the Presidential nomination, said they viewed his travel plans as the early stage of a White House campaign. ''There is no basis to say I'm being coy about running for President,'' Mr. Cuomo said in an interview. ''If I chose to explore the Presidency, I wouldn't do it in a backward way. I'll say I'm exploring the Presidency.'' But when asked outright if he was running, he did not completely rule out the possibility of a race. ''It's what I've always said: 'I have no plans,' '' he said. The Governor, whose first-term lieutenant governor resigned two years ago, said that with the beginning of a second term on Thursday, with a new lieutenant governor, he now felt he could spend more time traveling. He acknowledged that the trips would stir talk of a Presidential race, but said he had found that speculation existed no matter what actions he took. Mr. Cuomo, who was to be sworn in tonight in a private ceremony at the Governor's mansion, added that in the past he had frequently turned down speaking engagements elsewhere in the country for fear of generating speculation about the Presidency and that, as a result, ''I have forfeited the opportunity to say good things.'' Trips to Crucial States The five states he mentioned for visits early in 1987 include ones considered crucial to any Presidential race. Three of the states - Florida, North Carolina and Louisiana -are in the South, an area where many strategists have said Mr. Cuomo needs to spend time to soften an image as ''a Northeastern liberal.'' Many national strategists say the South could be the key in the 1988 race for the Presidency. A fourth state, Iowa, holds the earliest official Presidential test, the Iowa caucuses, in early 1988. And the other state, California, is home to many large campaign contributors and has the most electoral votes. ''I would suspect that for Mario Cuomo, this is the first stage of something,'' said Gov. Richard W. Riley of South Carolina. ''This is the first I have known of any concrete evidence that he might really be an interested candidate.'' ''This is a right interesting occurrence,'' said Mr. Riley, who is a former chairman of the Democratic Governors Association. ''This look-see is good for him and the Democratic Party, and I would like to see more of it.'' Mr. Cuomo's travel plans include the following: * Feb. 11, in Los Angeles for the 15th anniversary dinner of the Center for Law and the Public Interest. * Feb. 16, at Tulane University in New Orleans for a symposium entitled ''Directions 1987.'' * Feb. 27, at a forum sponsored in Boca Raton, Fla., by the political columnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak. The Gover-nor may also stop at the spring-training camps of the Mets and the Yankees. * In March, on a date yet to be set, for a forum at Duke University in Chapel Hill, N.C. * In May, on a date not released, in Grinnell, Iowa, for the commencement speech at Grinnell College. Mr. Cuomo has traveled extensively nationally before - in 1986, he made six trips outside New York State, not including occasional official visits to Washington. But previously, he has always announced trips individually. The fact that he disclosed five trips at one time was viewed by national strategists as an intention to send a signal. 'Nothing Spectacular' Mr. Cuomo responded that ''these aren't political trips.'' ''This is nothing spectacular,'' he continued. ''These are all invitations that have been lingering for a long time and I told them decisions would not be made until the end of the legislative session.'' Democratic officials in several of the states said that while Mr. Cuomo was visiting they wanted him to attend political functions as well, such as fund-raising events. Asked about that, Mr. Cuomo said those requests had not yet reached him. ''Nobody's asked me,'' he said. When asked if there was a theme that he would stress throughout his trips, the Governor said he doubted so because the forums were so varied and because some of them would be mostly question-and-answer sessions. 'Like Going to a Carnival' ''Evans and Novak - that's pure fun,'' he said jokingly of the Florida visit. ''They're all conservatives and you stand up there and they all beat you up. It's like going to a carnival where they tie your hands behind your back and they throw baseballs at your head.'' Later in the interview, however, the Governor sounded a theme that he has been talking about more and more and that many expect would be the thrust of a Presidential campaign. He talked about a failure by the Reagan Administration and by Washington generally to recognize that economic problems -unemployment, the Federal deficit, the imbalance in trade, third-world debt -are interconnected and require a broad, unified solution. Referring to the economic problems, he pointed out that both houses of Congress would be Democratic beginning in 1987 and added, ''With this wonderful opportunity the Democrats fought to win, comes a very heavy burden of responsibility because now you have to produce.''
