161|1987\01\01|REAGAN SENDS UPBEAT SPEECH TO SOVIET PEOPLE OVER 'VOICE'|President Reagan, in a New Year's message to the Soviet Union, said today that the two countries were ''closer now than ever before'' to an agreement to reduce nuclear arsenals.|President Reagan, in a New Year's message to the Soviet Union, said today that the two countries were ''closer now than ever before'' to an agreement to reduce nuclear arsenals. President Reagan, in a New Year's message to the Soviet Union, said today that the two countries were ''closer now than ever before'' to an agreement to reduce nuclear arsenals. In a 10-minute radio broadcast, which the Voice of America also transmitted to Eastern Europe, Mr. Reagan said that the United States and the Soviet Union had taken major steps toward permanent peace in 1986. The upbeat comment offered a different assessment of Soviet-American relations than the one given in Moscow. On Tuesday, a spokesman for the Soviet Foreign Ministry rejected a proposal that Mr. Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev exchange New Year's greetings over television, as they did last New Year's Day. The Soviet spokesman said such an exchange at this time would be inappropriate in view of what he described as the low state of relations and a deadlock in arms control talks. After the Soviet rejection, the White House decided to transmit Mr. Reagan's message by radio. In the speech, Mr. Reagan said that the Iceland summit meeting on Oct. 25-26 had yielded positive results despite its collapse over limitation of space-based missile defenses. Although the aftermath has left a new arms control accord in doubt, according to American officials, Mr. Reagan said: ''We did move things a good distance forward. On many issues, we made more progress in those two days than our diplomats made in the last two years. Yes, a great deal of work remains, but both sides are closer now than ever before.'' Mr. Reagan did not mention two of the issues that, according to Soviet spokesmen, have chilled relations. One is Mr. Reagan's decision to stop adhering informally to the provisions of the unratified strategic arms limitation treaty of 1979. The other is his refusal to join Mr. Gorbachev in a halt of nuclear weapon testing. In his message, Mr. Reagan seemed to praise the Soviet Union for its decision to end the exile of Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and rights advocate. ''Whenever there is a restoration of those rights to a man or a woman, as has happened recently,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''it helps strengthen the foundations for trust and cooperation between our two countries. And by the same token, whenever those rights are denied, the foundation is seriously weakened. We welcome progress in this area, as much as we welcome it in the effort to secure nuclear arms reduction.'' Mr. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, arrived here Monday from Los Angeles to spend the New Year at the 220-acre estate of Walter Annenberg, the publisher. The Reagans have welcomed the New Year at the Annenberg estate for nearly two decades.
