165|1987\01\01|HILL IS ACHIEVING GOALS FOR KNICKS|During his first month as head coach of the Knicks, Bob Hill spoke often about how the team, after more than two horrendous seasons, must ''learn how to win'' again. He repeated the phrase so often, in fact, that it began to sound like the rantings of an eternal optimist - the kind who insists the glass is still half-full even when the bottom is bone dry.|During his first month as head coach of the Knicks, Bob Hill spoke often about how the team, after more than two horrendous seasons, must ''learn how to win'' again. He repeated the phrase so often, in fact, that it began to sound like the rantings of an eternal optimist - the kind who insists the glass is still half-full even when the bottom is bone dry. During his first month as head coach of the Knicks, Bob Hill spoke often about how the team, after more than two horrendous seasons, must ''learn how to win'' again. He repeated the phrase so often, in fact, that it began to sound like the rantings of an eternal optimist - the kind who insists the glass is still half-full even when the bottom is bone dry. Hill even tried some not-so-subtle tactics, such as placing signs that read ''Unselfishness is contagious'' in the locker room, and putting on display three trophies representing the Knicks' three Eastern Conference championships. And he sometimes placed inspirational messages in players' lockers, one of which read: ''You play this game with your hands and feet, but you win it with your head.'' The players now admit it. They snickered. Hill, however, appears to have gotten through. On Tuesday, the Knicks gained the kind of victory that some of the players say they would not have achieved under Hill's predecessor, Hubie Brown. Down by 10 points to the Washington Bullets with less than 7 minutes to play, they combined defensive intensity, offensive creativity and even a bit of trickery to attain a 103-97 triumph at Madison Square Garden that extended their winning streak to four games. Bullets Stifled The defensive intensity stifled a team that appeared to have command of the contest with a 91-81 lead and two of the league's most explosive offense weapons - the Malones. Moses Malone, the center, and Jeff Malone, the guard, went into the game accounting for 47 percent of the Bullets' scoring with averages of 25.8 and 24.6 points per game, respectively. Together, they scored only one basket in the final minutes of the game and the Bullets scored only 6 points in the final 6 minutes 23 seconds. Gerald Wilkins, as is becoming his habit, supplied the offensive creativity for the Knicks. He scored 10 of his game-high 29 points in that final 6:23 as the Knicks outscored the Bullets by 22-6. Two of his baskets came on soaring bank shots high off the glass on plays that could not have been more stunning if they were made by Michael Jordan. And the trickery? That was Hill's domain. First, he employed a three-guard alignment with Gerald Henderson, Trent Tucker and Wilkins. Then he allowed Tucker and Wilkins to decide who would play small forward. And, finally, he designed a play during a timeout that allowed the 6-foot-5-inch Wilkins to take advantage of a bigger, but slower defender, the 6-8 John Williams. Worked to Perfection It all worked to perfection. Later, in the victorious locker room, talk centered on how much of an impact Hill has had on the same group of players that Brown could not affect. Would the Knicks have won this game with Brown as their coach? ''No way,'' Trent Tucker said quickly. ''First of all, me and Gerald would not have been out there together and we would not have had the freedom to decided among ourselves who would play what position. And we simply wouldn't have known how to win the game.'' ''I don't know. I can't make that assessment,'' said Rory Sparrow, who had seven assists in just 19 minutes off the bench against the Bullets. ''We are playing with a lot more confidence than we were back then. If we had won this game six weeks ago, it might have been a freak, but I think we can do this every night.'' Ewing in Foul Trouble ''The biggest thing is that we're a lot less predictable,'' said Bill Cartwright, who scored 23 of his 27 points in the first half to keep the Knicks in the contest when Patrick Ewing was held to just 5 minutes in the half because of fouls. ''We've made a lot of changes. The players laugh about it sometimes because we can't keep up with them. They're not big changes, it's just that other teams don't know what to expect from us now. It's tough to defend a team when you don't know what they're doing.'' Hill was evasive in answering the question, but he finally said that, under Brown, the Knicks ''probably wouldn't have come back like we did.'' He paused, thinking back to those times when he was an assistant coach for Brown, then re-emphasized his point. ''No question, it's all about learning how to win again. Once I'm on the sidelines, even I think we're going to win now.''
