166|1987\01\01|TESTAVERDE IMPRESSIVE TO THE END|The woman said her name was Olga. She introduced herself to the not-so-long-ago unknown young man from Elmont, L.I., who was now being honored at a dinner in Washington. The affair was not unlike the dinners in New York, Philadelphia and Dallas. The dinners have been interspersed with television appearances in Los Angeles and New York and a conversation with the President of the United States in Washington.|The woman said her name was Olga. She introduced herself to the not-so-long-ago unknown young man from Elmont, L.I., who was now being honored at a dinner in Washington. The affair was not unlike the dinners in New York, Philadelphia and Dallas. The dinners have been interspersed with television appearances in Los Angeles and New York and a conversation with the President of the United States in Washington. The woman said her name was Olga. She introduced herself to the not-so-long-ago unknown young man from Elmont, L.I., who was now being honored at a dinner in Washington. The affair was not unlike the dinners in New York, Philadelphia and Dallas. The dinners have been interspersed with television appearances in Los Angeles and New York and a conversation with the President of the United States in Washington. The appearances have taken place before and after crack-of-dawn departures from airports and nearly-middle-of-the-night arrivals in other airports. Other scheduled events have been canceled well beyond the last minute, when people were waiting. The dinners and the attention and the smiles and the handshakes and the promise of financial security the near future holds, all have been a hard-earned reward for years of obscurity. Yet the moments, all of which have somehow been compressed into the past month, have seemed a blur except for just a few, including the time in Washington when Olga sat down beside him. ''She's probably just a nice lady,'' he said that day. Olga had insisted to others that she was Vinny Testaverde's mother. Which would come as a surprise to Josephine Testaverde of Elmont, L.I., whose 23-year-old son recently left a Heisman Trophy in her home. Tomorrow evening in the Arizona desert, he can become the eighth Heisman winner to play for a champion of a news-service poll. Testaverde would be just the third to play for an undefeated, untied national champion that won a bowl game, following Davey O'Brien, the Texas Christian quarterback in 1938, and Tony Dorsett, the Pittsburgh running back in 1976. Regardless of what is eventually said of his football career, regardless of the outcome of the Fiesta Bowl game tomorrow between his University of Miami Hurricanes and Penn State, it can never be correct to say that Testaverde never had a dinner. On the outside, he appears the same friendly, polite transplanted New Yorker who had been ignored while the crowds formed next door around the locker of Bernie Kosar, his predecessor as the Hurricane quarterback. ''We were at an Italian-American banquet in Pittsburgh,'' said Joe Paterno, the Penn State coach. ''My wife said he gave her his rolls, his butter. She couldn't get over how polite and shy he was.'' Who knows what the sirens could possibly have been doing to the inside? Paterno and his recruiters have dominated Long Island in recent years, but he did not remember ever hearing the name Testaverde when the quarterback played for Sewanhaka High School. After tomorrow night, who will not have heard the name? Testaverde prepares for a football game he must know may well place a large permanent plus or minus next to his name. He has paused this week to think of responses to questions - a process he once found frightening - on topics such as the future of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the team that will soon own his professional rights, a subject that has nothing to do with his immediate existence and everything to do with what will come right around the next bend in the road. Among his other gifts, Testaverde seems to have had a talent for seeing beyond the glitz to possess an understanding of who and what he is, and an ability to sidestep a sense of self-importance as if it were just another blitzing linebacker. His need to be part of a group led him to join the camouflage-wearing platoon that descended in the desert this week. But while teammates have embarrassed themselves and their university with their us-against-the-world rhetoric, Testaverde offered how he enjoyed spending time with Shane Conlan, the Penn State linebacker. Two years ago this week, when Kosar had not yet graduated from Miami and all logical thought seemed to indicate that Testaverde's professional interests would be best served by transfering to a school that held a better opportunity to play, he chose to remain. Less than five months ago, he perceived his growing fame by saying that he thought some football fans knew the University of Miami had a quarterback from Elmont, L.I. A revision has been made necessary by the last month. ''They may not know my name,'' he said this week, ''but they know a little bit about me. They know a little bit more than they did back then. I just feel like I have a lot of friends.'' Apparently. His new acquaintances have included that old jokester, Bob Hope; an ex-football broadcaster named Ronald Reagan, and that new talk-show hostess, Joan Rivers. When he returned to school, teammates were waiting. Mike Irvin, the sophomore wide receiver, remembered with a smile: ''We said, 'Hey, Vinny, could you put down the Heisman and get ready for Penn State?' Or, 'O.K., Vinny, you know the President. Now you can come to practice with the little people.' '' ''He is at his best,'' said Jimmy Johnson, the Miami coach, ''and he is most relaxed, when he is on the field. He would like to get up in the morning, put on sweats, lift weights and go out and play catch.'' The process has grown far more complicated. At Johnson's suggestion, a security guard employed by the university escorts Testaverde in public this week. ''I thought it was a good idea,'' Testaverde said. ''There are a lot of people walking around. You don't know if some of them are your friends and some of them are your enemies.'' His working regimen was disrupted by the pace of the schedule and the injury from his recent motor-scooter accident. His girlfriend of several years, who last August was one of the first people Testaverde suggested could lend some insight into who he is and where he has been, is now his former girlfriend. And more and more people want to be friends. Supporters of the idea for an annual national championship college football game might do well to consider a system that has already created the need for a well-adjusted college senior to be accompanied by a security guard. PLAYERS
