167|1987\01\01|USX SETS $300 MILLION WRITE-OFF|The USX Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $300 million charge in the fourth quarter to retire debt from its $2.9 billion acquisition of the Marathon Oil Company in 1982.|The USX Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $300 million charge in the fourth quarter to retire debt from its $2.9 billion acquisition of the Marathon Oil Company in 1982. The USX Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $300 million charge in the fourth quarter to retire debt from its $2.9 billion acquisition of the Marathon Oil Company in 1982. The $300 million charge is to account for the difference between the par value of the bonds and the value at which they were carried on USX's balance sheet. USX said that the action would reduce its financial costs by more than $140 million a year. The redemption will be made on March 1 for all of its 12.5 percent guaranteed notes due 1994. The company said that the redemption represented the last of the debt from the Marathon acquisition. USX said it had arranged $1 billion in loans from Citibank to finance the redemption. The loan will be secured with future earnings from Marathon's prized Yates oilfield in Texas, the company said. ''The redemption is a key element in the corporation's ongoing restructuring,'' USX's chairman, David M. Roderick, said. USX also said talks were continuing between representatives of Mr. Roderick and Carl C. Icahn, the New York investor. In October, USX received a $31-a-share, $8 billion takeover proposal from Mr. Icahn. The company declined the proposal, saying it was studying various restructuring possibilities. Mr. Roderick has maintained that the company has not yet determined what form any restructuring would take. He said a restructuring plan would be presented to the company's board by the end of January. The company has received a proposed restructuring package from Goldman, Sachs & Company, its financial advisers. USX said the options presented were numerous. USX has said it would consider a number of possibilities, including a large stock buyback, the sale of certain operations or doing nothing at all. No Mediator Recommendation The company also said yesterday that a mediator had declined to make recommendations for a settlement in a work stoppage by the United Steelworkers union that has idled USX's plants for the last five months. Earlier, USX had said it wanted recommendations by yesterday for a settlement. ''We had hoped for a recommendation by Dec. 31,'' a USX spokesman said. ''But deadlines don't seem to mean much in this business.'' Bruce Johnston, USX executive vice president, and James McGeehan, union treasurer, have been negotiating regularly with Sylvester Garrett, a steel labor specialist, since mid-December, when Mr. Garrett was brought in to end an impasse in the talks. Sources close to the negotiations said the talks would probably resume tomorrow. No progress has been reported since Mr. Garrett's appointment on Dec. 18.
