169|1987\01\01|A LUXURY LINE FALTERS AT G.M.|Rob Mancuso said his heart sank when the General Motors Corporation first displayed its new, downsized Cadillac Seville and Eldorado models to dealers in Las Vegas about a year ago. ''The guy next to me and I looked at each other and we said the same thing: 'They're not going to sell.' ''|Rob Mancuso said his heart sank when the General Motors Corporation first displayed its new, downsized Cadillac Seville and Eldorado models to dealers in Las Vegas about a year ago. ''The guy next to me and I looked at each other and we said the same thing: 'They're not going to sell.' '' Rob Mancuso said his heart sank when the General Motors Corporation first displayed its new, downsized Cadillac Seville and Eldorado models to dealers in Las Vegas about a year ago. ''The guy next to me and I looked at each other and we said the same thing: 'They're not going to sell.' '' Unfortunately for himself and for G.M., Mr. Mancuso, a Cadillac and Honda dealer in the Chicago suburb of Barrington, Ill., was right. The two Cadillacs and their companion models, the Buick Riviera and Oldsmobile Toronado, are G.M.'s biggest automotive sales flop of 1986. And because these high-priced cars (the Seville has a base sticker price of $26,326) are also among G.M.'s most profitable, their sickly sales have contributed to the company's woes. G.M.'s problems include a falling market share and a $338.5 million operating loss in the third quarter of 1986, but the four luxury models are ''the single biggest product fiasco'' in recent G.M. history, said Maryann N. Keller, an auto industry analyst with Furman Selz Mager Dietz & Birney in New York. Sales Fall 51 Percent All four models are built on what G.M. calls its ''E/K platform.'' In 1985, the E/K's predecessors had combined sales of 161,437 in the January through November period. The total in the comparable period of 1986 slipped to 78,941, a 51 percent decline. Since the estimated profit on these models is more than $5,000 a car, industry analysts figure the slump in E/K sales will reduce G.M.'s earnings by some $500 million this year. One primary problem seems to be the belief of many drivers that they no longer need to drive smaller cars and conserve gasoline. Just as soaring gasoline prices caught G.M. and Detroit with big, gas-guzzling cars twice in the 1970's, now G.M. is trying to sell cars designed for fuel scarcity at a time when gasoline is plentiful and big cars are back in favor. When these cars were being designed, G.M. forecasters were predicting prices of $2 a gallon for gasoline; it is currently selling for closer to $1. Decline in Owner Loyalty G.M. executives acknowledge that previous buyers of Eldorados, Rivieras, Sevilles and Toronados do not like the new versions, which are smaller, lighter and less powerful -but more expensive - than those they replaced. In addition, the new models strongly resemble some of the company's lower-priced cars - a serious problem in the luxury-car market, where buyers seek distinction as much as comfort. ''Almost every Eldorado or Seville sale now has to be a 'conquest sale,' '' commented William E. Hoglund, the head of G.M.'s Buick-Oldsmobile-Cadillac Group. A conquest sale, in Detroit parlance, is one in which the buyer previously drove a competing make. ''In the past,'' Mr. Hoglund added, ''in those product lines, we relied heavily on owner loyalty.'' Meanwhile, G.M.'s competitors report strong sales of their traditional, rear-wheel-drive luxury cars. Production of Ford's Lincoln Town Car was increased during the year, and the Chrysler Corporation has arranged to use American Motors' production facilities so it could continue to build the Chrysler Fifth Avenue, a model that had been scheduled for elimination. 'Elrivado' Styling Criticized Auto industry watchers say sales of the E/K models have slumped, in part, because they share the problem of ''lookalike'' styling that has plagued other G.M. lines in recent years. Car and Driver magazine, in a review of the Buick Riviera, said it looks like a Somerset Regal - a smaller, less expensive model -''with a case of terminal swayback.'' The magazine added that for a car that is supposed to be an expression of the owner's personality, ''The new Riv is so low-key as to be invisible in a parking lot full of contemporary G.M. models.'' Other assessments were similarly unflattering. Road & Track magazine called the cars, collectively, the ''Elrivado.'' The models were so much alike, it said, it did not make sense to review them separately. Irvin W. Rybicki, who recently retired as G.M.'s vice president for design, said model lines that lacked styling distinction resulted from fears about another energy crisis, as well as G.M.'s huge conversion from rear-wheel to front-wheel drive and the pressure from management to hold down development budgets. ''With all the investments that were being made in plants and engineering, there wasn't a lot of money left for sheet metal,'' Mr. Rybicki said. Designers ''had to play the corporate game'' and accept fewer styling touches than they would have liked. Not Impressive Enough G.M. also erred, some outside analysts said, in introducing the E/K luxury cars soon after the similarly styled - but smaller and lower-priced - ''N'' platform cars: the Buick Somerset Regal, Oldsmobile Calais and Pontiac Grand Am. Traditionally, G.M. established styling trends with its more expensive cars and in later years incorporated those themes in cheaper models. Mr. Mancuso, the Illinois G.M. dealer, said prospective buyers of the Seville and Eldorado had told him the cars simply did not look impressive enough. ''They don't want them sitting in their driveway,'' he said. There has been criticism of the cars' interiors, as well. In its quest to be technically sophisticated, Buick installed a cathode-ray tube with a touch-sensitive screen in the Riviera. It monitors engine functions and controls the heating and cooling systems, the radio and cassette player and a trip computer, but it is in the middle of the instrument panel, out of the driver's line of vision. A driver who wants to change radio stations or adjust the temperature must take his eyes off the road and touch the screen one or more times to pull up the right computer ''menu'' and make the adjustment. Noting that Buick says the screen replaces 92 switches, Road & Track commented, ''After driving the Riviera for a while, even the prospect of driving a car with 92 switches was more appealing.'' Dealers and analysts add that young, technically sophisticated buyers - those who might find touch-screen controls appealing - are unlikely to shop for a Riviera because of its history as a large car with an older target audience. Larger Versions Planned Stretched versions of the E/K cars are on G.M.'s drawing boards, but because of the long lead times in the auto industry they will not be available until late 1988 as 1989 models. In the meantime, in a move to balance supply with sales, G.M. is cutting production from two shifts to one at its showplace assembly plant on the border of Detroit and Hamtramck. By cutting production, G.M. may be able to avoid the costly incentives it would need to sell an oversupply of the models - but it also means the overhead of the $1 billion, automation-packed plant will be spread over fewer cars, squeezing G.M.'s profit margin. G.M. executives are also trying different marketing strategies to sell the cars available now. Cadillac cut the price of 1987 Sevilles and Eldorados by about 6 percent, and added equipment to the Buick and Oldsmoble models while holding the price line. Buick also added a travel incentive, promising Riviera buyers two airline tickets to any destination served by Trans World Airlines until Feb. 28. Mr. Hoglund said that until the 1989 models arrive, G.M.'s basic strategy is to use special marketing programs to induce sales prospects to take test drives. Once inside the cars, the hope is that customers will think less about the size and styling and be impressed by the ride, handling and appointments. ''If somebody has a better solution, I'd like to hear it,'' Mr. Hoglund said.
