175|1987\01\01|BOTHA ANNOUNCES EARLY WHITE VOTE|President P. W. Botha announced tonight that there would be early general elections next year for the nation's white electorate. Editor's Note: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or ''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.|President P. W. Botha announced tonight that there would be early general elections next year for the nation's white electorate. President P. W. Botha announced tonight that there would be early general elections next year for the nation's white electorate. The move, political commentators said, was designed to win a renewed mandate for the Afrikaner National Party after 28 months of black revolt, mounting international ostracism and increasing reliance on emergency rule to withstand demands for black majority rule. The party has been in power since 1948. Mr. Botha, who made the announcement in a televised New Year's message, said he would announce a date for the election in January. Press commentators, who have been speculating about an election for months, have suggested that it will be held in mid-March. Elections were not expected until 1989. In the broadcast, Mr. Botha set an electioneering tone, seeking to rally white voters by condemning Western powers, including the United States, for hypocrisy toward his land and by vowing that his Government was ''not prepared to sacrifice our right of self-determination in our fatherland.'' A Promise to Whites The language represented a coded promise to the white minority of five million that their Afrikaner leaders would not hand over the country to a black government drawn from majority rule based on an unqualified, universal franchise. Mr. Botha made no announcement of new elections for the two junior houses in the country's segregated three-chamber Parliament - those occupied by legislators of mixed and Indian racial descent. Those legislatures were chosen in elections in 1984 marked by widespread abstentions and the first stirrings of the nation's violence and protest, which have claimed 2,300 lives since September 1984. ''I think the time to consult the white electorate on a number of fundamental issues is fast approaching,'' he said in his broadcast. ''By-elections should in any event have been held in the near future in a number of constituencies. It is consequently preferable to hold a general election for the House of Assembly in the coming year.'' Mr. Botha did not say whether the vote would be held under the nation's newest emergency decree, in force since June 12, which makes it an offense to oppose or resist the authorities in their handling of the nation's crisis. Program Is Stalled South African political commentators have suggested that Mr. Botha, aged 70 years and reportedly concerned about his health, wishes to cement his party in power among white voters before stepping down and leaving to others the job of continuing his program of cautious racial reform. That program has all but stalled in the nation's unrest. While the authorities have scrapped some apartheid legislation, such as the pass laws inhibiting black access to the fringes of white cities, they have balked at further changes in such laws as those that segregate schools and residential areas. Referring to foreign pressures on his Government to accelerate change, Mr. Botha declared tonight, ''We dare not yield to the irresponsible and often superficial demands which will destroy everything created over so many decades by so many generations.'' In an evident reference to sanctions by the United States and other Western countries and economic pressures such as divestment, he said, ''Actions taken against us have been totally counterproductive.'' 'This Incredible Haste' Mr. Botha said it took the United States from 1776 to 1870 ''to complete their Constitution and grant civil liberties to its black minority community, and another century and a fierce civil rights struggle to insure that those rights were more than theoretical rights.'' ''Even after that, further amendments were necessary,'' he said. ''So I put this question - why all this incredible and unnatural haste with the multi-cultural South Africa with our vast historical differences and traditions? ''The course on which certain Western powers have now embarked directly serves the interests of the forces who do not seriously believe in democratic principles. These hypocritical forces do not want to have a negotiated, peaceful solution in South Africa.'' ''If they are allowed to play their present game, it can only result in the establishment of a tyrannical dictatorship in this country,'' he said. ''That we will oppose with a determined national will.'' Editor's Note: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or ''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.
