176|1987\01\01|HASSIDIC MAN, HURT IN A RACIAL ATTACK LAST SUMMER, DIES|A Hasidic man who was beaten to unconciousness by a group of black teen-agers on a Brooklyn subway platform last summer died Saturday of his injuries, the police said yesterday.|A Hasidic man who was beaten to unconciousness by a group of black teen-agers on a Brooklyn subway platform last summer died Saturday of his injuries, the police said yesterday. A Hasidic man who was beaten to unconciousness by a group of black teen-agers on a Brooklyn subway platform last summer died Saturday of his injuries, the police said yesterday. The incident came to light yesterday when Mayor Koch issued a statement deploring the death as ''the consequence of another act of violent hate.'' Mr. Koch said he issued the statement at the request of members of the Hasidic community of the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn. The Hasidim said that they were concerned about the lack of publicity about the death of the Jewish man in comparison to that about the racial incident in Howard Beach, Queens, that led to the death of Michael Griffith. Mr. Griffith, a black man from Brooklyn, was struck by a car on Dec. 20 after he fled a group of white attackers, according to the police. 'Is Jewish Blood Cheaper?' ''We agree that Howard Beach is terrible,'' said Rabbi Israel Rosenfeld, the director of the Crown Heights Jewish Community Council. ''We don't condone Howard Beach, but why is Jewish blood any cheaper than black blood?'' According to the police, the victim, Israel Rosen, 49 years old, was hit over the head repeatedly with a wooden club while waiting for a train at the Kingston Avenue IRT station, at Eastern Parkway, at about 9 P.M. on July 2. His assailants, the police said, were five or six black youths, who fled without taking anything from the victim. Capt. Donald Bromberg, the commanding officer of the police department's Bias Incident Investigating Unit, said that the beating was investigated as a racial incident because of the different ethnic backgrounds of the attackers and the victim and ''because we were unable to find any other motive.'' Mr. Rosen, who had a beard, was dressed in the dark garb characteristic of Hasidic men. Reward Was Offered The Jewish Community Relations Council of New York and its constituent council in Crown Heights offered a $5,000 reward in the case.
