179|1987\01\01|LUMBER PACT WITH U.S. IS CRITICIZED IN CANADA|Canadian lumber industry executives today condemned an agreement that will set aside a 15 percent United States tariff penalty on Canadian softwood exports to the United States and replace it with a 15 percent Canadian export tax.|Canadian lumber industry executives today condemned an agreement that will set aside a 15 percent United States tariff penalty on Canadian softwood exports to the United States and replace it with a 15 percent Canadian export tax. Canadian lumber industry executives today condemned an agreement that will set aside a 15 percent United States tariff penalty on Canadian softwood exports to the United States and replace it with a 15 percent Canadian export tax. The executives were joined by politicians opposed to Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's Government, which reached the agreement in Washington late Tuesday under the pressure of a midnight deadline set under United States trade law. The agreement will apply to Canadian exports that captured 32 percent of the United States softwood market in 1985, at a value of about $2.9 billion. Industry analysts here forecast that the new export tax will reverse a trend that has seen Canada widening its American market share in recent years, as layoffs and bankruptcies have increased in the United States softwood industry. American companies, contending that low fees in Canada for timber cutting amounted to an unfair subsidy, led the fight for a tariff penalty that resulted in a Commerce Department ruling that imposed the 15 percent import levy. Critics here had argued that Canada should resist increased softwood levies and should carry the issue into international trade tribunals if necessary. The Government, although bristling, decided to go for a quick settlement that would keep the increased duties, amounting to an estimated $435 million, in Canada. In addition, the officials wished to avoid a final ruling by the Commerce Department that they feared might encourage similar petitions by other American industries facing strong Canadian imports. The announcement of the accord was greeted with satisfaction in official quarters. The Forestry Minister, Gerald Merrithew, said that it had avoided a potentially damaging precedent for Canadian industries, while the Premier of British Columbia, William Vander Zalm, whose province accounts for 70 percent of the softwood exports involved in the dispute, maintained that any damage would lie mainly with United States consumers faced with higher prices. ''Life will go on,'' Mr. Vander Zalm said. ''The forest companies, I'm sure, will survive and continue to log and mill and do all of the wonderful things that create employment.'' This view was bitterly contested, however, by spokesmen for some of the companies affected. ''It's bizarre, it's sickening,'' said Adam Zimmerman, president of MacMillan Bloedel Ltd., one of the country's largest forest products companies. 'An Industrial Paraplegic' Mr. Zimmerman, who is chairman of the Canadian Forest Industries Council, said that the Washington agreement had made ''an industrial paraplegic'' of Canadian lumber companies and threatened to wipe out their entire profits at a stroke. Other critics contended that the agreement would throw as many as 20,000 Canadians out of work, set a precedent for future American interference with the pricing of Canadian natural resources and encourage protectionist forces that have made this a troubled year in Canada-United States trade. ''Whether we're talking about the export of wood products, pork, corn, tubular steel, fish, any major Canadian export now is subject to this kind of action by the United States,'' said Edward Broadbent, leader of the New Democratic Party, which is heavily backed by labor unions. After announcing that Canada would put the new tax in effect on Jan. 8, officials here were critical of President Reagan's decision to impose a bridging levy of 15 percent on the Canadian imports until the new tax takes effect. A senior official in Ottawa, speaking on a background basis, called the President's action ''a bit of greed and haste.'' Beyond all this, opponents of the deal said that it cast a pall over the Mulroney Government's initiative to liberalize the rules governing trade between the two countries, the world's largest trading partners. The broad trade initiative, explored in talks that began last May, have run into major obstacles that have raised doubts about the prospects for an accord before a September 1987 deadline set by Congress. Hostile Feelings The trade tensions have generated hostile feelings among many Canadians who generally are well disposed toward the United States. Even Mr. Mulroney, whose Government's fortunes rest heavily on the attempt to negotiate a broad trade deal with Washington, has spoken about his doubts that the United States appreciates ''its friends.'' The Mulroney administration had been buffeted by a United States decision in May to impose a stiff tariff on Canadian cedar shakes and shingles, a major British Columbia export, and had retaliated with a range of tariffs on American imports as varied as computer parts and Christmas trees. Then, in October, Canada slapped a countervailing duty of about 70 percent on American corn imports, saying that United States farm policies amounted to unfair subsidization.  U.S. APPLAUDS PACT WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 (Special To The New York Times) - Reagan Administration officials applauded the agreement with Canada that ended the often contentious lumber dispute, which had threatened to derail broader free trade negotiations between the two countries. ''We commend the negotiators on both sides of the border,'' said S. Bruce Smart Jr., Under Secretary of Commerce for international trade administration. ''The solution successfully addresses the problem,'' added Alan Woods, deputy United States trade representative.
