181|1987\01\01|BORN IN '00, THEY AWAIT NEW YEAR|It's been quite a century, so far, for Lucia Radl, Mabel Brown, Arthur Linksz, Annie Flanagan and Meyer Greenberg.|It's been quite a century, so far, for Lucia Radl, Mabel Brown, Arthur Linksz, Annie Flanagan and Meyer Greenberg. It's been quite a century, so far, for Lucia Radl, Mabel Brown, Arthur Linksz, Annie Flanagan and Meyer Greenberg. Each intends to turn 87 years old in 1987. And having survived it all since 1900, each can claim - perhaps more than most Americans - a certain proprietary right to the 20th century. Not that it has been easy. As they looked back on what has been wrought in their time, they turned to words bearing the weight of great upheaval - revolution, world wars, a Great Depression, a Holocaust, civil rights, women's liberation. They have seen it all - the automobile, the airplane, radio, television, the computer, the hydrogen bomb and the space age. ''Resilient,'' said Dr. Radl, a Manhattan psychiatrist, when asked how she faced what she had to face. ''How can you survive if you are not resilient?'' 'Get Me a Bottle of Rum' And yesterday afternoon, Miss Brown, who lives in Harlem, knew exactly how she would face the start of another New Year. ''Going to get me a bottle of rum and just be right here in my house,'' she said. ''Going to sit up until they drop the ball. And when they do I'll jump up, shout 'Hallelujah,' clap hands and thank God for me being here.'' For Dr. Linksz, a retired Manhattan ophthalmologist who has written two books since turning 80, it all began in a time of crowned heads, prancing steeds and gilt-edged coaches. ''The years from 1900 to 1914, they were the last years of the Hapsburg monarchy,'' said Dr. Linksz, who grew up in a tiny town on the plains of Hungary. ''The peasant still tilled the soil. And optimism was great. But it turned out to be not justified.  ''There were great expectations,'' he said. ''Technical progress was supposed to be the salvation of mankind.'' That, he said, was long before the Nazis perfected the technology of mass murder and, among the millions, killed many members of his family. Dr. Linksz recalled the advent of the airplane. ''Only the angels were supposed to fly,'' he said. ''Nobody expected that the first airplane would mean so much change, but it did. My father would say that each night the soul flies into God's lap. That's what we knew about flying.'' In all her years, Mrs. Flanagan ''has never been on a plane. And I never drove a car.'' She was too young then, she said, and too old now. ''In them days, most people didn't have cars.'' Mrs. Flanagan, who now lives in Flushing, Queens, came to the United States in 1921 from County Mayo, Ireland. ''There was 10 children in my family,'' she said, ''but, of course, there was 10 to 12 in every family. There wasn't enough jobs to go around, so this was the best country to come to.'' Mrs. Flanagan remembers ''the uprising of 1916. It was against the British. It was always against the British. There was always fighting there, you get used to it.'' Cannon echo in the memory of Dr. Radl. ''I was born in Odessa, Russia, on the Black Sea,'' she said. ''In 1905, I experienced the bombardment of Odessa by the ship, Potemkin. The sailors had started a revolution'' - a hint of the overthrow of the Czars to come - ''but it was not successful. ''We lived through the revolution and the First World War,'' Dr. Radl said. ''I heard and saw the fighting in the street. I was 18. Too much war and revolution and killing.'' Mr. Greenberg came uncomfortably close to war during his decades as a merchant seaman. He worked on the convoys crossing the Atlantic during both world wars. Mr. Greenberg grew up, and still lives, in Brooklyn. ''I remember the gangsters that congregated around the Brooklyn Navy Yard,'' he said. ''They played cards and they wore big diamond rings all polished up meticulously. I remember all the speakeasies and the bootlegging; the smuggling across Gravesend Bay in fast speedboats, bringing in liquor.'' His life at sea ''was hard,'' Mr. Greenberg said, ''because the unions were weak at that time. Oh, is it hard work - handling heavy owsers and wire cables to tie up the vessel.'' And, during the wars, it was frightening. ''I went across with the big convoys,'' he said. ''A hundred or more ships carrying the vehicles, the ammunition and the troops. We were always suspicious of submarines underneath, aircraft overhead. We had ashcans on the stern of the vessel, filled with bombs, depth charges.'' It was just luck, he said, that kept him safe. ''At Murmansk,'' he said - referring to the Soviet port where Allied aid was off-loaded - ''the submarines were picking off the merchant ships one after another.'' Between the wars, Dr. Radl, who came to the United States in 1939, fought another kind of battle. ''In 1920, I was studying medicine,'' she said. ''I chose a male-dominated profession. In a way, I was a pioneer. 'You Better Be a Cook' ''Later on, when I was a doctor, if I wanted to be in the operating room, they pushed me away. Even when I came here to the United States, and I went for financial help, they said, 'We have enough doctors, you better be a cook.' I said, 'No way, this is what I'm going to be.' '' Miss Brown, meanwhile, was fighting a somewhat similar battle. ''Yes indeed,'' she said, when asked whether there was racism - even lynchings - when she was a small girl in Macon, Ga. ''The white people down there, you worked for them, but don't get in their way and don't say nothing wrong. If you say something wrong, they kill you just like they kill a cat. ''You have to say, 'Yes, Ma'am' and 'No, Ma'am,' '' Miss Brown said. ''But I never said 'Yes, Ma'am' and 'No, Ma'am' to none of them, because I didn't think they were no better than me. That's right.'' Mrs. Flanagan, who worked as a domestic for most of her years in America, said she thought New York ''was much nicer years go.'' Neighborliness was evident, she said, when someone on the block came home with one of those big, cardboard crates. ''Not everyone had a television then,'' Mrs. Flanagan said. ''I remember, we used to go to other people's houses.'' Back then, she said, ''There was no robberies, no killings. There was no such thing as locking doors.'' Still, at almost 87, Mrs. Flanagan has much to be happy about. ''My grandchildren, they keep me going,'' she said. ''I'm living my life over again with them. You don't sit home worrying about your pains. They make you laugh.'' Mr. Greenberg keeps himself young by ''doing all the good I can for other people. In so doing I help myself,'' he said. ''The Lord loves that.'' And Dr. Radl remains ''an optimist.'' ''I hope that there will be survival in spite of the nuclear age,'' she said. ''We don't need so much upheaval.''
