182|1987\01\01|REAGAN PLANS TO ASK CONGRESS TO RESTORE CONTRIBUTION TO U.N.|President Reagan has told Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar that he will ask Congress to restore millions of dollars in financial cuts that pushed the United Nations close to bankruptcy, United Nations and American officials said today.|President Reagan has told Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar that he will ask Congress to restore millions of dollars in financial cuts that pushed the United Nations close to bankruptcy, United Nations and American officials said today. President Reagan has told Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar that he will ask Congress to restore millions of dollars in financial cuts that pushed the United Nations close to bankruptcy, United Nations and American officials said today. According to the officials, Mr. Reagan spoke to Mr. Perez de Cuellar after praising organizational changes recently adopted by the General Assembly, which included giving the major donor nations a bigger voice in United Nations spending. Mr. Reagan's comments, which he made nine days ago, were made public today at the United Nations. ''The United Nations took an historic step to adopt sweeping reforms of its organization and methods of operation,'' Mr. Reagan said. Noting that his Administration had long pushed for such changes, the President added, ''We are very pleased that these measures have finally been adopted.'' United Nations officials say they regard Mr. Reagan's statement as the clearest indication of the Administration's support for the United Nations in the aftermath of extensive Congressional budget cuts that plunged the organization into the worst financial crisis of its 41-year history. The United States owes the United Nations $110 million of its $210 million assessment for 1986, or more than 10 percent of the United Nations budget of $800 million. Congress cited the need for organizational change as justification for the cuts. The resolution passed by the Assembly included a key demand of the United States: that the big donors have a larger voice in deciding how the United Nations spends its money. To accomplish this goal, it gives the 21-nation Committee for Program and Coordination a key role in preparing the budget. The committee will now receive budget proposals a year in advance, set a ceiling on the budget, decide on its content and set a limit on appropriations that could be later added on by the Assembly. All of these decisions are supposed to be made unanimously, or by consensus. This would give each of the committee members a veto, and thus more power to major donors like the United States represented on the committee. Until now, each of the 159 member states of the Assembly had one vote on budget matters. 'Has Not Gone Unnoticed' The chief United Nations spokesman, Francois Giuliani, said of Mr. Reagan's statement: ''This is the most positive statement of support for the U.N. to come out of the Reagan Administration. We're delighted to see that the genuine effort at reform has not gone unnoticed.'' Secretary General Perez de Cuellar, who has sharply criticized the Reagan Administration for what he said was the failure to pay its dues and the breaking of its commitment to live up to the United Nations Charter, also praised Mr. Reagan's statement today. ''I am satisfied with the positive reaction of the U.S. Administration,'' Mr. Giuliani quoted the Secretary General as saying. ''I'm counting on the efforts of the Administration to obtain the necessary funding for the United Nations.'' One American official said that after the Assembly approved the package of organizational changes, ''There was a sea change in attitudes'' in the Administration. President Reagan was pleased by the changes, and he telephoned Mr. Perez de Cuellar on Dec. 22 to congratulate him on the package, which was unanimously adopted by the General Assembly three days earlier after months of often bitter closed-door debate. ''Mr. Reagan expressed satisfaction at what had happened during the General Assembly,'' Mr. Perez de Cuellar said. ''He said he hoped it would enable him to go to Congress to obtain necessary funds.'' Warm Welcome by Bush In addition, when the General Assembly President, Humayun Rasheed Choudhury of Bangladesh, visited Washington on Dec. 22, he was warmly received by Vice President Bush, who expressed appreciation for his efforts in pushing through the package, said Richard C. Hottelet, chief spokesman at the United States Mission. In his statement, Mr. Reagan greeted the changes as a key mechanism for strengthening the United Nations, which both the Administration and Congress have repeatedly criticized for fiscal irresponsibility, a bloated bureaucracy and anti-Americanism. ''These reforms are designed to strengthen the organization's effectiveness and efficiency in carrying out its important political, economic and social objectives,'' Mr. Reagan said.
