183|1987\01\01|LAW CHANGES INCLUDE A CUT IN INCOME TAX|New Yorkers will see their state taxes cut, have the right to inspect their medical records and pay a fee for driving all-terrain vehicles under new laws that take effect today.|New Yorkers will see their state taxes cut, have the right to inspect their medical records and pay a fee for driving all-terrain vehicles under new laws that take effect today. New Yorkers will see their state taxes cut, have the right to inspect their medical records and pay a fee for driving all-terrain vehicles under new laws that take effect today. These are just a few of the measures the Legislature passed last year and Governor Cuomo signed into law. In addition, a public authority with the power to buy the Long Island Lighting Company and bar the Shoreham nuclear plant from opening will be created on Jan. 15. Also, the State Comptroller will be empowered to withdraw state pension fund money invested in American companies operating in Northern Ireland that do not help fight religious discrimination against the Catholic minority. The state's pension funds now hold $797 million worth of stock in 12 American companies with operations in Northern Ireland. What may have the greatest effect on New Yorkers' pocketbooks is $1.65 billion in tax relief, the third phase of a state tax cut enacted in 1985. Under the law, the maximum rate on earned income will drop to 9 percent from 9.5 percent. The personal exemption increases to $900 from $850. The Legislature and Mr. Cuomo are expected to struggle during the year over how to return an expected windfall of state revenues that will result from changes in the Federal tax laws. The Governor's office has estimated the windfall between $1.2 billion and $2 billion, while the State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, has put the amount closer to $2.4 billion. Another state agency, the Department of Motor Vehicles, will charge drivers of all-terrain vehicles a $10 annual registration fee and a $3.25 one-time license plate fee. New Yorkers needing medical assistance will have the right to inspect and obtain copies of records in doctors' offices, hospital charts, X-ray results and laboratory and diagnostic tests. Most hospitals and doctors have not made a patient's medical records available. The new law does not apply to patients in psychiatric hospitals, institutions for the mentally disabled and alcohol and drug treatment. The are among other new laws that start today: * Consumers who sign dating service contracts will be able to cancel within three business days. * Employers and their insurance companies who intentionally try to delay hearings on workers' compensation claims face mandatory fines of $100 for each hearing delay. * Motorists who pass stopped school buses where children are boarding or leaving face stiffer fines and longer jail terms. * Hotels, motels and lodging houses are required, effective Jan. 17, to make available smoke-detecting devices that warn deaf and hearing-impaired guests. * Leashed dogs approved by the State Department of Environmental Conservation will be allowed to track down dead or wounded deer and bears at the start of the 1987 hunting season.
