185|1987\01\01|SANTUCCI IS SAID TO WEIGH GIVING CASE TO THE U.S.|Queens District Attorney John J. Santucci, who has been stymied in his efforts to prosecute the Howard Beach case, is considering asking Federal authorities to take on the death of Michael Griffith as a civil-rights violation, city law-enforcement officals said yesterday.|Queens District Attorney John J. Santucci, who has been stymied in his efforts to prosecute the Howard Beach case, is considering asking Federal authorities to take on the death of Michael Griffith as a civil-rights violation, city law-enforcement officals said yesterday. Queens District Attorney John J. Santucci, who has been stymied in his efforts to prosecute the Howard Beach case, is considering asking Federal authorities to take on the death of Michael Griffith as a civil-rights violation, city law-enforcement officals said yesterday. They said Mr. Santucci was considering this step because it would be easier to gather evidence and convict the defendants under Federal law than state law. Mr. Griffith, a black man, was struck and killed by a car on the Shore Parkway in Howard Beach on Dec. 20 after he fled a gang of white youths who had beaten him and two other blacks, according to the police. The man Mr. Santucci has called the key witness in the case, Cedric Sandiford, Mr. Griffith's stepfather, was also beaten. Mr. Sandiford's lawyer has said the witness would not cooperate with Mr. Santucci's office because its investigation was in bad faith and included a cover-up, a charge the prosecutor and other city officials deny. Ease of Prosecution The lawyer, Alton H. Maddox Jr., at a meeting with reporters yesterday in Brooklyn, said Mr. Sandiford would cooperate with a Federal investigation of the case, just as he would with an inquiry by a special state prosecutor appointed by the Governor - an appointment called for by the lawyers. Under Federal civil-rights law, it would be easier to prosecute the three white teen-agers who now face reckless endangerment charges in the attack, as well as others who might be charged, in view of Mr. Sandiford's lack of cooperation, said the city law-enforcement officials, who declined to be identified. They said this was so because Federal immunity and conspiracy laws make it easier to gain and use the testimony of accomplices in the crime than state laws do. The officials further said that the penalties for a Federal civil-rights conviction in a case in which the violation caused a death could be up to life in prison, the same maximum as for a murder conviction under the New York State penal code. Although the officials did not say so, a Federal prosecution would permit Mr. Santucci to extricate himself from a situation in which he has been unable to move forward on an emotional case that has captured the city's attention. Murder, manslaughter and assault charges Mr. Santucci's office brought against the three arrested teen-agers were thrown out by a Queens judge Monday. The judge, Ernest Bianchi of Criminal Court in Queens, acted after finding that the evidence that prosecutors presented at a hearing, at which Mr. Sandiford did not testify, was insufficient to sustain those charges and sufficient only to sustain charges of reckless endangerment. City law-enforcement authorities also said that if the Federal prosecutors took over the case and sought Mr. Sandiford's cooperation, it would put his lawyer, Alton H. Maddox Jr., under ''great pressure'' to advise his client to cooperate with the Federal inquiry. Mr. Maddox and another lawyer working with him, C. Vernon Mason, could not immediately be reached for comment on the report that Mr. Santucci was considering requesting a Federal civil-rights prosecution. The reports came late yesterday afternoon, after the lawyers had held a news conference on the case in Brooklyn. They have been calling for Governor Cuomo to appoint a special state prosecutor to take over the case. No Confirmation Mr. Santucci's office declined to confirm that he was considering asking for a Federal civil-rights prosecution. Aides to Mr. Santucci who declined to be identified said he would still prefer to have his office prosecute the case. They said Mr. Santucci still hoped Mr. Sandiford and his lawyer would change their mind and cooperate with the office so that it might seek to have a grand jury reinstate the murder, manslaughter and assault charges that Judge Bianchi dismissed. Without Mr. Sandiford, Mr. Santucci's aides have insisted, their chance of obtaining an indictment on those charges, let alone a conviction, remains slim. City law-enforcement officials said Mr. Santucci's office could proceed with a state prosecution even after Federal authorities began a prosecution of their own, but the city officials noted that problems of double jeopardy could then be encountered. The chief assistant United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, Laurence Urgenson, whose office would prosecute a Federal civil rights case, said Federal authorities had made no decision yet on whether to ''go ahead with a Federal case.'' He said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had begun a ''preliminary investigation'' into the assault and Mr. Griffith's highway death and that his office had ''been in touch'' with Mr. Santucci's office during the last week. But he said neither Mr. Santucci nor his aides had asked for a Federal prosecution and that ''it would be premature'' to conclude that it would be easier to prosecute this case under Federal civil rights statutes than under state criminal laws. He said the F.B.I. began its inquiry at the request of the Justice Department's civil rights division in Washington, which made the request on the basis of news reports of the case. Regarding conspiracy law, the city officials said, an accomplice's testimony must be corroborated by other evidence - testimony by a nonaccomplice or physical evidence - if it is to be used in a state prosecution, whereas it need not be corroborated to be used in a Federal prosecution.
