186|1987\01\01|HOMELESS WORKING MEN GET THEIR OWN SHELTER|For more than a year, Shawn Bateza has been living in the city's shelters for the homeless and trying to hold down a job.|For more than a year, Shawn Bateza has been living in the city's shelters for the homeless and trying to hold down a job. For more than a year, Shawn Bateza has been living in the city's shelters for the homeless and trying to hold down a job. But in the cavernous rooms where most men are housed, it is often hard to sleep. ''There are radios blasting all the time,'' Mr. Bateza said. ''Guys are fighting. Some of them are crazy.'' And there is no way to get breakfast before 7 A.M., or to accept late-night overtime without risking the loss of his bed. In a new shelter in Brooklyn, the city is trying to make it is easier for homeless men to hold down jobs -often the first step toward getting out of the shelter system. These days, Mr. Bateza, who is a bicycle messenger, can get cereal, juice and coffee at 5 A.M. He can ask an aide to make sure he is up on time. He can call in and explain if he wants to work overtime. Responsibility Is Goal He and about 100 others who have jobs are living in a shelter at the former Greenpoint Hospital, at 300 Skillman Avenue, at Kingsland Avenue, in the Greenpoint section. They are participating in a program intended to help them keep their jobs and, within 90 days, find housing on their own. ''The concept is to make them feel special and at the same time get them to take responsibility for their lives,'' said Sylvia Castaneda, who has been running the program since it began last October. To get into the program, the men must sign a contract agreeing among other things to put half their salaries into a savings account and attend workshops on personal hygiene, how to keep a job, how to look for an apartment and how to budget money. If the men lose their jobs or do not find a place to live by then, they must return to other shelters. Since the program started, 45 men have moved out, 19 to known addresses - what Ms. Castaneda considers a clear success. Of the 26 others, a few were sent to other shelters because they refused to follow the rules. But most lost their jobs. An Experiment, for Now ''They can come back,'' Ms. Castaneda said, ''as soon as they get it together.'' If the shelter proves effective, officials of the city's Human Resources Administration said, the program will be expanded and offered to homeless women and families. With its yellow-tiled walls and linoleum floors, the shelter is far from cozy, but life here is more pleasant than in most shelters, the men there say. The rooms are quite small, but, even without doors, they offer some privacy. And, because all the men must have daytime work to get in the program, there is little noise at night. Best of all, the men say, they feel far safer segregated from the homeless who do not have jobs - men, they say, who are more likely to steal or be mentally ill. ''If you want to get it together, you can do it here,'' said Mr. Bateza, who is 26 years old and has struggled with a drug problem for several years. Some of the men in the program have been in shelters for as long as two years, holding jobs off and on. Others have been homeless for just a few months. Most are in their 20's or 30's and work as messengers, security guards and drivers of delivery trucks, earning the mininum wage of $3.35 an hour, and trying to save enough money to put down a rent deposit and buy furniture. Working 35 hours a week at the minimum wage, they would be required to save about $55 a week. Lies to Keep Jobs In the meantime, most of the men say that they must lie about where they are living or risk loosing their jobs. For that reason, many did not want their names used. A few said they had turned to the shelter system, because the housing they could afford was usually in such bad repair and in such dangerous neighborhoods that the shelters were no worse. ''Some of these rooms, you might as well be in a shelter,'' said Antonio Rivera, who has already saved $1,200 over the last few months and intends to go to Puerto Rico soon to make a new start. ''People break into those rooms like crazy.'' Mr. Bateza said that in the large shelters he had been unable to force himself to save. ''You're living rent free,'' he said. ''You got no responsibility, you tend to just go out on pay day and spend.'' Some turned to the program because they hoped the additional supervision and care would help them help themselves. Since there are only about 100 men in the program, the staff knows almost everybody and can prod those who need it to keep appointments and follow the shelter's rules. Ms. Castaneda, a woman who is quick to laugh and just as quick to dress down a 200-pound man who has been rude, spends a good deal of time reminding the men to look for apartments or keep appointments. ''Sometimes,'' she says, ''these guys are like children. They want the attention.''
