191|1987\01\01|NO LONGER QUESTION MARKS|The last big game Tim McKyer remembered was in 1984. His school, Texas-Arlington, played Lousiana Tech for the Southland Conference championship. ''We lost,'' he said, ''34-blank.''|The last big game Tim McKyer remembered was in 1984. His school, Texas-Arlington, played Lousiana Tech for the Southland Conference championship. ''We lost,'' he said, ''34-blank.'' The last big game Tim McKyer remembered was in 1984. His school, Texas-Arlington, played Lousiana Tech for the Southland Conference championship. ''We lost,'' he said, ''34-blank.'' Don Griffin's last big game was last year. His school, Middle Tennessee State, beat Akron for the Ohio Valley Conference championship. ''But I don't remember the score,'' he said. Such are the humble beginnings of the San Francisco 49ers' starting cornerbacks - rookies, roommates, each from a small school where he played safety, each about to play in the next biggest game of his life - a National Conference division playoff game Sunday in Giants Stadium against the Giants. Six months ago, McKyer and Griffin were little more than 6-foot, 176-pound question marks that Coach Bill Walsh and his staff thought might develop. McKyer was taken on the third round of the college draft, Griffin on the sixth. ''McKyer had good speed and quickness,'' said George Seifert, the 49ers' defensive coordinator. ''We liked him as a cover man. Griffin was one of those guys you figure, maybe he will, maybe he won't make the team, and where we drafted him, he probably shouldn't have.'' Both players developed to such a degree that McKyer started every game at left cornerback, Griffin all but one at right cornerback. Walsh called them ''the two best rookies at their positions'' in the National Football League. Aware of Inexperience Whether they are or they aren't is now of less importance than how they perform against the Giants, who were well aware of their limited experience five weeks ago in their 21-17 victory over the 49ers in Candlestick Park. Phil Simms had his best game of the season with 27 completions for 388 yards, but he is best remembered more for engineering three touchdown drives within 11 minutes of the third quarter, which began with the 49ers leading, 17-0. McKyer and Griffin remember only too well what Simms did. Stacy Robinson beat McKyer for a 34-yard touchdown pass that cut the lead to 17-14, and on the next series, he beat Griffin for a 49-yard completion at the 49ers' 1-yard line. One play later, the Giants led, 21-17. McKyer erred in judgment and allowed Robinson to get by him. Simms said after the game, ''I just caught the guy sleeping.'' And the other day at his news conference, Walsh noted that McKyer ''let up because he didn't think the ball was going to be thrown to his side.'' ''I felt like dirt,'' McKyer said today, recalling the touchdown pass. Griffin Less Distressed Griffin was less distressed over the play he was involved in. He had covered Robinson well; Robinson simply made a great catch. Anyway, it is not a cornerback's nature to dwell on the negative. He can't, and the good ones don't. In that respect, McKyer and Griffin are fortunate in that as roommates, they commiserate with each other, ''get each other going,'' as McKyer said. Moreover, they have history on their side: The 49ers won their first of two Super Bowls in 1981 with three rookie defensive backs - Ronnie Lott and Eric Wright at the corners and Carlton Williamson at strong safety. Dwight Hicks was the veteran of the group, a third-year player at free safety. This season, Lott, who led the league in interceptions with 10, has played at free safety. Wright has missed every game but one with a groin injury. Williamson has started every game at strong safety. Hicks never reported because of a contract dispute and was released. Later in the year, he signed with the Indianapolis Colts. Neither McKyer nor Griffin had any idea the season would turn out this way for them. McKyer came into training camp only trying to make the team, figuring ''I had a 50-50 chance.'' ''But they had a position open,'' he said. ''I thought, with hard work, who knows?'' ''I really didn't know about my future,'' said Griffin. ''I felt if I could do the job, do well, work hard, I could make the team. As for starting, I just didn't know.'' Amazed at Rookies Seifert is fairly amazed at how well they have played as rookies, handling new positions, the pressure of a division race and the added attention playoff teams seem to generate. ''You also have to consider their backgrounds,'' he said. ''Eric, Ronnie and Dwight were all from big schools. They were used to big games, big crowds. And our system then was just developing; it was much less complicated than it is now. These guys have come in here at 7:30 three mornings a week from day one to look at films. They're still doing it.'' They feel as if they have to. The 1986 team has matched the 1981 team only by winning the division. At the moment, the current group is three victories away from a league championship. ''We know all about the 1981 team,'' McKyer said. ''They did as a young team. It would be nice if we could, too.''  N.F.L. PLAYOFFS
