194|1987\01\01|LAWYERS FOR QUEENS ASSAULT VICTIMS EXPLAIN REFUSAL TO AID INVESTIGATIONS|The lawyers for two of the black men who were beaten in the Howard Beach racial incident asserted yesterday that their clients had refused to cooperate with the Queens District Attorney because prosecutors were ''making a case'' for the white defendants.|The lawyers for two of the black men who were beaten in the Howard Beach racial incident asserted yesterday that their clients had refused to cooperate with the Queens District Attorney because prosecutors were ''making a case'' for the white defendants. The lawyers for two of the black men who were beaten in the Howard Beach racial incident asserted yesterday that their clients had refused to cooperate with the Queens District Attorney because prosecutors were ''making a case'' for the white defendants. Inside Our Lady of Charity Roman Catholic Church, at 1669 Dean Street in the Crown Heights section, the lawyers spoke for more than an hour before eight television cameras and scores of reporters and supporters who frequently applauded the lawyers. The lawyers - Alton H. Maddox Jr. and C. Vernon Mason - made separate statements. They answered seven questions before leaving the church and declining further interviews. Neither of their clients, Cedric Sandiford and Timothy Grimes, was at the church. The church was the site of the funeral for the third victim of the attack, Michael Griffith, who was struck and killed by a car on Shore Parkway after he fled from a group of white youths, according to the police. Mr. Griffith's mother, Jean, attended the lawyers' session with reporters yesterday, as did her sons Christopher and Anthony. These are the principal assertions made yesterday by Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason and reponses from the authorities: The Inquiry The lawyers said that Mr. Sandiford had cooperated fully with prosecutors and detectives for three days, and that he had refused to do so only after prosecutors demanded that he view a lineup of potential suspects. Mr. Sandiford, the lawyers said, had told prosecutors he was unable to do so because he was suffering from serious eye injuries that impaired his vision. ''Nobody would ask a blind man to view a lineup unless he was conducting a bad-faith investigation,'' Mr. Maddox said. A spokesman for Mr. Santucci, Thomas McCarthy, said the District Attorney was aware of Mr. Sandiford's vision problems. Two days after the attack, Mr. McCarthy said, Mr. Sandiford told prosecutors that his eyesight had improved and that he then had agreed to attend a lineup. Later that same day, according to Mr. McCarthy, Mr. Maddox told prosecutors that he was representing Mr. Sandiford and that his client was unable to view the lineup. '' We would never demand he view a lineup when he was indicating difficulties with his vision,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''Since Mr. Maddox entered the case we have not heard directly from Mr. Sandiford.'' The lawyers also contended that the District Attorney's office had failed to obtain statements on videotape from the three teen-agers who detectives said admitted participating in the assaults. Mr. McCarthy said videotaped statements are normally obtained after a suspect is identified in a lineup. ''Because Mr. Sandiford did not participate in a lineup we never got to the videotaping stage,'' he said. The Assault The lawyers said that after Mr. Sandiford was beaten by white youths, he was mistreated by white police officers and detectives who strip searched him, mistreated him and threatened to file criminal charges against him. Alice T. McGillion, the deputy police commissioner for public information, said Mr. Sandiford was ''absolutely not'' strip searched. She said he was routinely ''frisked'' for weapons, but that he was not treated like a criminal. ''He was definitely treated like a victim,'' Ms. McGillion said. According to Ms. McGillion, both black and white detectives were assigned to the investigation. She said yesterday that personnel files were not immediately available for a breakdown on the number of white and black investigators assigned to the case. The lawyers said Mr. Sandiford told police officers and detectives that a car that had chased the three black men in the streets drove onto to the highway and struck and killed Mr. Griffith. Ms. McGillion said that Mr. Sandiford at first told the police that he had not seen the car strike Mr. Griffith. According to Ms. McGillion, Mr. Sandiford said he believed he had heard the impact of the accident. Mr. Sandiford also said, according to Ms. McGillion, that after Mr. Griffith had been run over, Mr. Sandiford saw on the highway a dark-colored car that had earlier chased the victims, Ms. McGillion said. Mr. McCarthy said Mr. Sandiford never told the police or prosecutors that he had seen the car strike Mr. Griffith. The lawyers said that the car that struck Mr. Griffith, driven by Dominick Blum, a 24-year-old city court officer, resembled the car that chased the three men on the streets of Howard Beach. The lawyers said Mr. Blum's car was not impounded, no photographs were taken of it and that Mr. Blum was not arrested for leaving the scene of an accident. Ms. McGillion said detectives have evidence that Mr. Blum was not involved in the street attack on the victims. She said Mr. Blum's car was not impounded because all of the forensic evidence, including paint scrapings and photographs, was taken. Other police officials have said Mr. Blum was not arrested because he returned an hour after the accident to the scene. Under normal police policy, drivers who return to the scene and volunteer statements are not arrested, officials said. Mr. Blum, according to the police, said he at first believed his car had struck an animal or tire on the road. According to authorities, Mr. Blum could be indicted later by a grand jury or charged by the police for leaving the scene. The Evidence The lawyers said no photographs of Mr. Sandiford's head and eye injuries were taken after the assault for possible use later as evidence. Ms. McGillion said such photos were taken on the night of the incident. The lawyers said that on the afternoon after the death, Mr. Grimes was picked up and kept in a room for two hours by detectives at the 106th Precinct station house in Queens. But, the lawyers said he was not questioned that day or afterward about the assault. Ms. McGillion said Mr. Grimes was questioned by the police but said he declined to give investigators an address of a woman that he and the two other victims had been visiting in St. Albans, Queens, before their car broke down. Christopher Griffith, the brother of Michael Griffith, said at the church meeting yesterday that on the afternoon after the death of Michael, detectives from the 106th Precinct picked up Mr. Sandiford at their home in the East New York section of Brooklyn for questioning. Mr. Sandiford is the stepfather of the Griffith brothers. Mr. Griffith said the detectives did not take notes of what Mr. Sandiford said and listened to a New York Giants-Green Bay Packers football game on the radio as they questioned him. The lawyers cited the questioning as an example of how Mr. Sandiford was mistreated and that the police from the start of the investigation discounted his version of events. Ms. McGillion said she had no information that Mr. Griffith was with Mr. Sandiford while he was being questioned. She also said that she could not verify yesterday whether or not detectives took notes or listened to a football game while questioning Mr. Sandiford. The Hearing Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason said that at the court hearing on Monday when murder charges against the three teen-agers were dismissed, the District Attorney's office did not enter hospital or medical records attesting to Mr. Sandiford's injuries. Mr. McCarthy said that prosecutors did not have the hospital records, and that Mr. Maddox had ''told us you are not going to use that as an excuse of a continuance.'' According to Mr. McCarthy, medical records would not have been relevant for obtaining a postponement of the hearing. Under New York State law, the defendants were entitled to a hearing on the charges against them on Monday because no indictment had been handed down against them by a grand jury. The lawyers, in their statements, said that Mr. Santucci's office had sufficent evidence and witnesses to obtain indictments without Mr. Sandiford's testimony. ''They are making him the hub of the case when he isn't,'' Mr. Mason said. Mr. Sandiford has declined to testify before a grand jury and Mr. Santucci has described his testimony as ''vital.'' Mr. Mason said yesterday that neither he nor Mr. Maddox were receiving fees for representing the two survivors and the Griffith family. Mr. Mason said the lawyers had no plans to file negligence suits against the city because of the racial attacks. Mr. Maddox's eyes watered and a tear was visible on his left cheek when he recounted having seen Mr. Ward in a television news report on Tuesday suggest that his motive for representing Mr. Sandiford was a fee in a civil suit. ''What Ben Ward said, hurt me more than anything else,'' Mr. Maddox added. Mr. Griffith's mother declined to answer any questions. Family members and lawyers also refused to provide information about Michael Griffith's background except to say he had been born in Grenada. Christopher Griffith said his family had declined an invitation from Mayor Koch to have breakfast at City Hall on Christmas Day in an effort to reduce racial tension. ''The dinner or breakfast I would like him to serve me is justice,'' Mr. Griffith said. At the meeting, the legal strategy and conduct of Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason was endorsed by Assemblyman Albert Vann, a Democrat of Brooklyn, The Rev. Calvin O. Butts 3d, executive pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Manhattan, the Rev. Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., executive director of the United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice, Jitu Weusi, a community activist, and the Rev. Al Sharpton, a community activist. In a prayer before the lawyers spoke, Mr. Chavis, said Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason had been ''scorned and ridiculed because they dared to represent the black families and victims of racial injustice.''
