197|1987\01\01|GUNFIRE HITS JET NEAR NORTH CAROLINA AIRPORT|A United Airlines jet coming in for a landing at Raleigh-Durham Airport was shot at today. The plane, carrying 16 passengers, landed safely, but a New York City man aboard was injured in the shooting.|A United Airlines jet coming in for a landing at Raleigh-Durham Airport was shot at today. The plane, carrying 16 passengers, landed safely, but a New York City man aboard was injured in the shooting. A United Airlines jet coming in for a landing at Raleigh-Durham Airport was shot at today. The plane, carrying 16 passengers, landed safely, but a New York City man aboard was injured in the shooting. The New Yorker, Barry Rollins, 30 years old, was hurt by a bullet that pierced the belly of the aircraft, passed through his thigh and lodged in his cheek. Mr. Rollins was admitted to Rex Hospital in Raleigh, where he was reported in stable condition. Flight 1502, which had taken off from Wilmington, N.C., was 300 feet in the air, south of the airport and about 20 seconds short of touchdown when Mr. Rollins was wounded. Pvt. Jeff C. Dillard, a Marine stationed at Camp Lejeune, N.C., one of the passengers on the Boeing 737 jet, said in an interview at the airport: ''Somebody shot the plane. It was from outside.'' A United Airlines spokesman, Kay Lund, said in a telephone interview from Chicago: ''It was one or two miles out when some object, believed to be a bullet, pierced the underside of the aircraft.'' The aircraft's landing was not affected by the shooting, Ms. Lund said. ''The pilot wasn't even aware of the incident until he landed.'' Mr. Rollins, wearing black basketball sneakers and a New York Mets jacket, was seated in Seat 16F at a window on the right side of the cabin, behind the wing. Private Dillard, who was seated two rows behind Mr. Rollins, said he heard a popping sound from the bullet, which left a hole 1 1/2 to 2 inches in diameter in the side of the plane. He said the bullet passed through Mr. Rollins's right thigh and lodged in his left cheek. ''I was helping hold a compress on his face,'' Private Dillard said. ''I think he was pretty much in shock as anyone would be.'' A passenger, George W. Chambers, who was returning home to New York, said a flight attendant asked Mr. Rollins what was wrong. Mr. Rollins replied, ''I don't know,'' Mr. Chambers said. Passengers who had planned to remain on Flight 1502 to its next stop, Dulles Airport near Washington, were put aboard another aircraft. The pierced jet was impounded on the runway and agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were called to the airport. ''We are going over the plane for any evidence,'' said Donald P. Paschall, chief of police at Raleigh-Durham Airport. 'Penetration in the Fuselage' ''We found penetration in the fuselage shortly behind the wing, and it did go through to where the passenger was sitting,'' Mr. Paschall said. ''We don't know if this was intentional or accidental.'' ''We are looking south of the airport for anything out of the ordinary,'' Mr. Paschall said. Wake County sheriff's deputies and North Carolina Highway Patrol troopers searched roads and wooded areas south of the airport tonight. John C. Brantley 3d, the airport director, said a similar incident had happened in the area about three years ago when some youngsters fired shotgun pellets into an approaching small airplane. The hole in the exterior of the United jet today was about five feet below the windows behind the wing. A Rex Hospital spokesman said at 8 P.M. that Mr. Rollins had been X-rayed and would undergo surgery ''to clean up his cheek.'' The shooting occurred about 5:25 P.M. Mr. Rollins was conscious when emergency medical technicians removed him from the plane, Mr. Paschall said. At 7:30 P.M. a Rex spokesman said Mr. Rollins was alert and had spoken by telephone with his mother. Sgt. C. M. Cummings of the North Carolina Highway Patrol said, ''It was definitely a bullet.'' Mr. Paschall, when asked if the shot might have been fired by a hunter, said, ''It's a possibility.''
