200|1987\01\01|23 BLACK LEADERS AND KOCH ATTACK 'PERVASIVE' RACISM|Mayor Koch and 23 black leaders agreed at City Hall yesterday to work together to attack what they called ''pervasive and systemic'' racism in the city.|Mayor Koch and 23 black leaders agreed at City Hall yesterday to work together to attack what they called ''pervasive and systemic'' racism in the city. Mayor Koch and 23 black leaders agreed at City Hall yesterday to work together to attack what they called ''pervasive and systemic'' racism in the city. Several participants called the meeting helpful, with Councilwoman Mary Pinkett of Brooklyn saying that it could help ''defuse'' things in the short run. Arthur Barnes, the president of the New York Urban Coalition, said that the meeting dealt with ''complex'' issues of race relations and that the participants felt that they had ''by persuasion and the weight of our logic'' convinced the Mayor that improvements were needed. Growing Tension Their remarks came in response to growing tension in New York City over a racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens, on Dec. 20. One of the victims, Michael Griffith, a 23-year-old black man, was struck by a car and died. On Monday, murder charges against three whites accused in the attack were dropped for insufficient evidence after another black victim of the attack refused to testify. The black leaders said yesterday that it was not their intent to take sides in the emerging debate over the investigation or the role that witnesses and lawyers have taken. Earlier yesterday, in an emotional meeting with reporters at a Brooklyn church, lawyers for the two surviving black victims criticized not only some of the blacks who were to meet with Mr. Koch but also the police and prosecutors who have been investigating the case. One of those at the church meeting, the Rev. Al Sharpton, derisively called the City Hall meeting ''a coon show.'' 'A New Lynch Mob' ''What we have in this situation is this,'' said one of the lawyers, Alton H. Maddox Jr. ''The Mayor, the Police Department, the Queens District Attorney's Office, the Police Commissioner and some of our Negro leadership have all formed a new lynch mob. And they are hounding and chasing the messengers for speaking the truth. We have a lynch mob that is running loose in New York City.'' Mr. Maddox and another lawyer for the black victims, C. Vernon Mason, also said that their clients had stopped cooperating with the Queens District Attorney's office because prosecutors ''were making a case'' for the white defendants. Point by point, Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason sought to show how the police and prosecutors had mishandled the case and had unfairly subjected them to criticism that they had hampered the investigation. At one point, Mr. Maddox's voice quavered and his eyes began tearing as he said he was hurt and insulted by Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward's suggestion on Tuesday that the lawyer was involved in the case for the money he could make from any civil suit growing out of the incident. ''How could Ward be used by that man that way,'' Mr. Maddox said, referring to Mayor Koch. ''I have not received a dime from the Griffith family or any soul breathing air on this earth. I have not been promised a dime from the Griffith family or from any soul breathing air on this earth. I have no expectations of receiving a dime from the Griffith family or any soul breathing air on this earth.'' 'An Even Greater Degree' At a news conference after the hour-and-a-half meeting in City Hall, the Mayor said that he had asked for and heard the participants' recommendations for eliminating racial discrimination in the city. The Mayor conceded that it may be more difficult to eliminate the racism ''in the hearts of people.'' But he vowed that his administration would work to see that the law was vigorously applied in cases of racial bias and racial violence. ''Those who violate the law should be brought to justice very quickly and, when tried and convicted, be sentenced to an even greater degree than they would if the case did not include that bias aspect.'' The Mayor's comments came in the wake of a meeting that at first appeared to what some of the black leaders had thought to be an attempt to reinforce his call Tuesday to the lawyers for one of the victims, Cedric Sandiford, to end their refusal to allow their client to be interviewed by the prosecutors. Although spokesmen for the Mayor insisted that was not its purpose, the suggestion was much on the minds of those who attended. Comment From Rangel Representative Charles B. Rangel, a Harlem Democrat, said that he was pleased that the Mayor had not tried to convince those in attendance that they should, as a group,''second-guess the judge, prosecutor witness or attorneys'' in the case. The Rev. Floyd H. Flake, who will soon take his seat as the new Congressman from the Queens district in which the Dec. 20 attack took place, added: ''It is appropriate that the Mayor has not tried to beat us in line on this issue, or to tell us what he wants us to do or say to the people. But to ask our concerns about what we do to eliminate racism.'' When asked whether the Mayor's concern was uncharacteristic, Mr. Rangel, in the past a frequent critic of the Mayor on a host of issues, including what he has termed Mr. Koch's lack of sensitivity to black concerns, was conciliatory and praised the leadership that the Mayor had shown so far in condemning the Howard Beach attack. But he added: ''When one responds in a manner that you would want them to, it serves no purpose to attribute any ill motivation to it. There is absolutely no question in my mind that the Mayor has been an outspoken critic of those who take the law in their own hands.'' Before and after the session, others reacted to the criticism of the session. Harriet Michel, the president of the New York Urban League, when asked about the criticism, said she was ''absolutely not'' attending the meeting to join in criticism of Mr. Sandiford and his lawyer, Mr. Maddox. 'Made Sure It Was Not' Roscoe Brown Jr., the president of Bronx Community College, said that the idea of joining the criticism of the victims' lawyers was never raised and ''we made sure it was not.'' Arthur Barnes, the president of the New York Urban Coalition, said that ''there was no lynch-mob atmosphere, but a positive and exemplary one.'' Prior to the meeting, Mr. Flake had said that all of those scheduled to attend had ''reputations and constituencies'' and could not afford to simply join the Mayor in criticizing the attorneys. ''I'm not part of a lynch mob or a coon show,'' said Councilwoman Priscilla Wooten of Brooklyn. ''I would not try to pressure the lawyers. When the Mayor says he wants to discuss black issues, I have to go.'' 'Great Deal of Respect' Although most of the participants said that the issue of joining the call for Mr. Maddox and his client to cooperate with the Queens District Attorney never arose, the Rev. Leo Hamilton of the Bethany Baptist Church in Jamaica, Queens, said that some did suggest to the Mayor that his evaluation of the case had caused problems. ''I have a great deal of respect for the Mayor, but he established a basis for evaluating this situation which almost seemed to throw the onus back on to blacks,'' he said of the Mayor's criticism of Mr. Maddox. ''We told him that we thought that should not have been the impression he left.'' Another participant in the meeting, who did not want to be identified, said that some had also criticized Police Commissioner Ward's suggestion at a news conference Tuesday with the Mayor that Mr. Maddox was motivated by the money that might result in a successful civil suit in connection with the racial attack. He said the comment was ''uncalled for.'' Among the things that the participants talked about, the Mayor said, was the need to do more in the city's education system and the enforcement of antidiscrimination laws in housing, employment and other areas to ''improve the racial climate'' in the city. Housing Problems The Manhattan Borough President, David N. Dinkins, said that many of the issues had come up in the past in other sessions in which blacks have criticized some city policies. ''These things tend to foster a climate that permits a Howard Beach to happen,'' said Mr. Dinkins, referring to problems of poor housing, poverty and the problems that he said plagued blacks in the city more than others. The Mayor termed the group an ad hoc one that was just the first of a number of such groups he would be meeting with to devise ways of easing racial tensions in the city and improving its racial climate. Perhaps the only specific initiatives he presented to the group were some details in a briefing by Schools Chancellor Nathan Quinones and the Board of Education president, Robert F. Wagner Jr., of a new curriculum on race relations and tolerance that is to be instituted within a few weeks in city schools. 'More Positive' Mr. Rangel said after the meeting that he personally saw a contrast in the way the Mayor had responded to the Howard Beach incident and his response to other issues in the past that bared racial tensions in the city. ''It is more positive,'' Mr. Rangel said, adding that he hoped that response indicated ''some continuity by the Mayor in creating an atmosphere to avoid these incidents in the future.'' The Mayor said that his feelings and attitudes toward prejudice remained the same, but allowed that he had expressed them differently and more intensely this time after the Howard Beach incident. He attributed that to his own experiences as a lawyer aiding civil-rights workers in the South during the 1960's, in which he himself was followed and chased by a group of whites opposed to the rights demonstrations. A 'Wrenching Experience' He said that the accounts of the fate of the person killed in the Howard Beach incident recalled for him his own feelings of terror then. ''This case caused me an enormous wrenching experience and I could feel the terror,'' the Mayor said. ''It was palpable and that's what caused me to single this out.'' None of the participants in the meeting responded to the use of the term ''coon'' by Mr. Sharpton. Mayor Koch noted, however, that Mr. Sharpton had sought an invitation to the session and had been refused. It was only after he had asked the Rev. Jesse Jackson to intercede for him with the Mayor that he was invited. ''Then he did what he did,'' the Mayor said, referring to Mr. Sharpton's failure to show up. These were the participants at the meeting with Mayor Koch:  Betty Adams.  Arthur Barnes, president of the New York Urban Coalition.  Laura Blackburne, counsel to State Conference of Chapters of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.  Roscoe Brown Jr., president, Bronx Community College.  David N. Dinkins, Manhattan Borough President.  Kenneth Drew, publisher, The Queens Voice.  Rev. Floyd H. Flake, U.S. Representative-elect from Queens.  Wendell Foster, Councilman from the Bronx.  Rev. Dr. William Gardner.  Rev. W. Leo Hamilton, pastor, Bethany Baptist Church in Jamaica, Queens.  Charles Hughes.  Rev. Vastor Johnson.  Rev. Fred Lucas.  Dr. Marcella Maxwell, chairman, City Commission on Human Rights.  Harriet Michel, president, New York Urban League.  Mary Pinkett, Councilwoman from Brooklyn.  Charles B. Rangel, U.S. Representative from Harlem.  Walter Smith.  Archie Spigner, Councilman from Queens.  Lamuel Stanislaus, Ambassador to United Nations from Grenada.  Edolphus Towns, U.S. Representative from Brooklyn.  Enoch Williams, Councilman from Brooklyn.  Priscilla Wooten, Councilwoman from Brooklyn.
