201|1987\01\01|COURT THROWS OUT CONTEMPT RULING AGAINST PAPER|The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit today threw out contempt convictions against the Providence Journal Company and its executive editor, Charles McC. Hauser, for printing an article two years ago about the late Raymond L. S. Patriarca, a reputed major organized crime figure.|The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit today threw out contempt convictions against the Providence Journal Company and its executive editor, Charles McC. Hauser, for printing an article two years ago about the late Raymond L. S. Patriarca, a reputed major organized crime figure. The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit today threw out contempt convictions against the Providence Journal Company and its executive editor, Charles McC. Hauser, for printing an article two years ago about the late Raymond L. S. Patriarca, a reputed major organized crime figure. The article was based on tapes of conversations involving Mr. Patriarca. The action overturned a verdict by Federal District Judge Francis J. Boyle, who sentenced Mr. Hauser to an 18-month suspended jail term and fined the newspaper $100,000 on conviction for criminal contempt. Judge Boyle's ruling stemmed from an article published Nov. 14, 1985 by The Journal about Mr. Patriarca that included information from Federal Bureau of Investigation logs and memoranda obtained by The Journal and others under the Freedom of Information Act. The court had banned publication of any article. Ruling 'Transparently Invalid' ''We conclude that the district court's order of Nov. 13, 1985, was transparently invalid,'' wrote Judge John Minor Wisdom, a Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals judge who was specially assigned to the case. ''The order constituted a presumptively unconstitutional prior restraint on pure speech by the press. The burden to sustain such an order is tremendously heavy, and was not met in this case. ''The only potential danger posed by the restrained speech was to an individual's privacy right. That right can be adequately protected by a subsequent damages action.'' The move to prevent publication was filed by attorneys for Mr. Patriarca's son, Raymond J. Patriarca. No Comment on Decision A lawyer for Mr. Patriarca, William A. Curran, said, ''I haven't seen the decision, so I don't have anything to say about it.'' Mr. Partriarca could not be reached for comment. Mr. Hauser is vice president of the company, which publishes The Journal, a morning and Sunday newspaper; The Bulletin, an afternoon paper, and The Journal-Bulletin, a Saturday paper. He issued a statement saying in part, ''We believed from the beginning that our publication of material from the so-called Patriarca tapes was protected under the First Amendment. ''The circuit court ruling sends a clear massage to lower courts that prior restraints on publication will not be tolerated.'' Statement by Publisher ''We're pleased that the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has upheld us,'' said Michael P. Metcalf, chairman and chief executive officer of The Providence Journal Company and publisher of The Providence Journal-Bulletin. ''The Circuit Court ruling strongly reaffirms similar findings on prior restraint issues. While The Journal-Bulletin felt it had no alternative but to publish in violation of the court's prohibition, our decision to do so was a most wrenching one. And while our action was drastic, it was taken with nothing but the highest respect for the court.'' Judge Wisdom heard the case with Levin Campbell, chief judge of the 1st Circuit, and Frank Coffin, a circuit judge. In his opinion, Judge Wisdom said the case involved a conflict between the First Amendment principle against prior restraint on freedom of the press and the need for orderly government and obedience to court orders.
