204|1987\01\01|SANDSTROM'S 3 STOP ISLANDERS|One team emerged energized, the other demoralized, and both spoke of the need to construct some winning streaks.|One team emerged energized, the other demoralized, and both spoke of the need to construct some winning streaks. One team emerged energized, the other demoralized, and both spoke of the need to construct some winning streaks. ''No matter how you slice it, to win on successive nights and in successive games is what it takes to build a consistent team,'' said John Vanbiesbrouck, the Ranger goalie, who last night credited his teammates with taking ''the big shots.'' The Rangers charged into the overtime session at Madison Square Garden, hitting posts and sending the Islander squad into a frenzy of disarray, but somehow the Islanders fended them off. Then, with 53 seconds left, Bryan Trottier received a slashing penalty and Tomas Sandstrom completed his hat trick for a 4-3 victory with 23 seconds remaining. It was the first hat trick as a Ranger for Sandstrom, whose ferocity at close quarters in front of the Islander net twice earned him game-tying goals and finally brought about the game-winner. ''It surprised me when they called the penalty at that time,'' he said, ''because they hadn't called much all night long. But I felt like every guy on our team was going for the win when we went out in overtime. If we didn't win this, they'd be ahead by 9 points, maybe too far to catch.'' In the overtime, the Rangers overwhelmed Kelly Hrudey, the Islander goalie, by taking six shots to none for his team. Wave After Wave ''What I saw was wave after wave,'' said Hrudey, who underwent similar straits to salvage a 3-3 tie at Pittsburgh on Saturday. ''Besides starting a new year, we really need to string some wins together.'' Lately, the Rangers, who beat the Penguins Tuesday night, been dominant in their division while the Islanders, now without a victory in their last four outings, had been unconvincing against all comers. Historically speaking, the Islanders have been notably unconvincing at the Garden, where their record, after last night, was 2-9-2 in their last 13 visits. ''The call against me was too obvious for me to even comment on,'' said Trottier, who did not appear to touch Tony McKegney with his stick. ''But we have to give them the edge in overtime. They created some good chances while we had none.'' Last night, as appears to be their wont in a series knotted 1-1-1 after three previous meetings, the two clubs jostled their way to a 3-3 tie in regulation time amidst more than the normal amount of hilarity, vulgarity and noisemaking. Sandstom scored his second goal of the evening and gained the tie at 5:32 of the final period when he arrived alone at the left post, collected a pass from Jan Erixon and made his move on Hrudey, who watched the puck whisk between his legs the moment he raised his stick to try and poke it away from Sandstrom. The Rangers, persistantly but often inartiscally on the attack, outshot their guests, 31-21, after three periods. Esposito Fills In Again The Rangers skated strongly, again under the vivid direction of General Manager Phil Esposito. Esposito will remain coach until Tom Webster, who is still recovering from ear surgery, returns on Monday. Esposito had to be pleased with the pace his players performed at, but their markmanship, especially on the power play, was less than forbidding in the first and second periods. But so, for that matter, was the offensive posturing of the Islanders, at least until a power-play opportunity came their way at the close of the first period. The Rangers went ahead, 1-0, at 12:50 when a defenseman, Curt Giles, sent a slap shot from the point bouncing past Hrudey, the Islanders' goaltender of choice in divisional matches (9-2-1 going into this game). Hrudey was partially screened by Tomas Jonsson as he moved Mike Ridley out of the crease area. Islanders Lethargic Once they had their goal, the Rangers concentrated on slowing down the Islander attackers, not such a monumental task, considering the lethargy of the attack in the early going. There was a preponderance of mild-mannered tugging and groping, and until Mike Ridley was caught on a high-sticking minor at 17:45, it seemed to work. But with four seconds remaining in the penalty, Patrick Flatley took Mike Bossy's pass and chipped a wrist shot by Vanbiesbrouck, who was returning to the nets after a two-game layoff that featured Bob Froese, and the game was tied 1-1 at 19:42. Alan Kerr got his second goal of the season for the Islanders at 10:58 of the second period when he blasted a low shot from the right circle past Vanbiesbrouck, providing the Islanders with a brief edge. But Sandstrom, who corraled Don Maloney's pass at the inside edge of the right circle and lauched it midair, gained a 2-2 tie at 14:30. The Islanders damaged the Rangers late in the period again, and took a 3-2 advantage when Rich Kromm snapped a high shot over Vanbiesbrouck's glove at 19:22.
