205|1987\01\01|EX-DEFENDANTS IN CHILD ABUSE CASE TO APPEAL RULING ON SUIT|Lawyers for three former preschool teachers said today that they would appeal a judge's ruling that tossed out part of a large civil suit alleging false arrest on charges of child abuse. He said the women had filed their suit too late.|Lawyers for three former preschool teachers said today that they would appeal a judge's ruling that tossed out part of a large civil suit alleging false arrest on charges of child abuse. He said the women had filed their suit too late. Lawyers for three former preschool teachers said today that they would appeal a judge's ruling that tossed out part of a large civil suit alleging false arrest on charges of child abuse. He said the women had filed their suit too late. The three former teachers, Virginia McMartin, the 79-year-old founder of the McMartin Preschool institution in nearby Manhattan Beach; her granddaughter, Peggy Ann Buckey, 30, and Babette Spitler, 38, filed civil suits this year, each seeking $10 million in compensatory damages and an unspecified amount in punitive damages stemming from their arrest, imprisonment and a long preliminary hearing. The three women filed their claims in Los Angeles Superior Court after all criminal charges against them and two other McMartin teachers were dropped last January. At the time, Ira Reiner, the Los Angeles County District Attorney, said the evidence against the five was ''incredibly weak.'' In all, seven McMartin teachers and administrators were arrested when the case began in 1984. There are now two remaining defendants, Peggy McMartin Buckey, 60, and her son Raymond, 28, who are awaiting trial. A hearing to determine if Mr. Reiner's office engaged in discriminatory prosecution in failing to dismiss the charges against Peggy McMartin Buckey and Raymond Buckey will resume Monday. Ruling on Deadline In dismissing the part of the civil suit that deals with false arrest, invasion of privacy and slander, Judge Warren Deering of Superior Court said the women should have filed their claims within 100 days of their arrest in March, 1984. He said that if the plaintiffs' assertions were that they were innocent at the time of the arrest, then they ''should have filed their claims within 100 days of that.'' James Davis, who represents Virginia McMartin and Peggy Ann Buckey, said today that to his knowledge the 100-day deadline ''had never been applied this way before.'' In an interview, Mr. Davis said it would have been a ''totally useless act'' to file within 100 days of their arrest in March, 1984, in part because criminal charges always take precedence over civil actions, which normally begin after criminal cases are over. 'A Bizarre Result' Mr. Davis argued that the 100-day deadline should run not from the time of arrest but from the date when Mr. Reiner dropped charges against the plaintiffs in January. He said the judge ''should have interpreted the statute as originally written,'' adding that he would ask Judge Deering to reconsider his ruling. ''It is a bizarre result,'' he added.  Mr. Davis and Eliseo D. W. Gauna, who represents Mrs. Spitler, said that the heart of their suit, that state officials, specifically the District Attorney's office, engaged in civil rights violations, was still intact. The civil rights section of the law does not have a 100-day time requirement, Mr. Davis said. The women say their prosecution and their long preliminary hearing were based on unreliable testimony of preschool children interviewed by therapists unschooled in criminal investigation. Under state law, district attorneys and their assistants generally have broad powers of immunity against civil suits and damages arising from their actions. County attorneys, representing the District Attorney's office, have raised the immunity argument in seeking to dismiss the action. But Mr. Davis argues that prosecutors do not have immunity for improper investigation. Officials Dispute Charges County attorneys representing the District Attorney's office also say that there was nothing improper in the nature of the McMartin investigation. Mr. Davis says the initial inquiry, which came amid a heated election campaign between Mr. Reiner and Robert Philobosian, the then District Attorney, led Mr. Philobosian to use the McMartin case to gain publicity. Mr. Philobosian lost the race. Mr. Philobosian, who was named as a defendant in the civil suit, has denied the charges.
