207|1987\01\01|AS LAVA FLOWS IN HAWAII, EXPLANATIONS ABOUND|David Lanakila figures the problem of the flowing lava was created by the Hawaiian fire goddess Pele because she objects to plans to drill into Kilauea's flanks to get steam to generate electricity.|David Lanakila figures the problem of the flowing lava was created by the Hawaiian fire goddess Pele because she objects to plans to drill into Kilauea's flanks to get steam to generate electricity. David Lanakila figures the problem of the flowing lava was created by the Hawaiian fire goddess Pele because she objects to plans to drill into Kilauea's flanks to get steam to generate electricity. Also, said this Hawaiian, who is called ''Uncle'' by those partying in the shade alongside the old house where he has lived 30 years, the fire goddess is in bad temper because Hawaiians, her people, long ago lost ownership of their land to whites. In the old Hawaiian religion, Pele controlled the volcanoes Mauna Loa and Kilauea and the paths taken by their lava flows were signs of her displeasure. Mr. Lanakila, pointing to the hill beneath the erupting 4,000-foot Kilauea, said: ''White people own it. It's a warning. She wiped out all those homes.'' He turned and peered through the palms to the sea 150 feet away. ''I always say leave it to Grandma; she knows what to do,'' he said, referring to Pele. The electric generating project in question has been built over five years with joint state and Federal financing. The geothermal electric plant has been installed and is operated by the Hawaii Electric Light Company, the electric utility for the island of Hawaii. The installation, which will be expanded to a capacity of 25,000 kilowatts by 1993, has not been threatened by the eruption because it is at a higher elevation. Scientists at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory have a different explanation for the lava flows in November and December that have destroyed 28 homes, cut a major highway, knocked out telephone and power lines and carried molten lava to the sea for the first time since 1974. The scientists' theory is that the Hawaiian islands were each built up over millions of years by flows of melted rock that rose from a ''hot spot'' in the sea floor in the Pacific. #3 Million Years in Building The Pacific floor is 18,000 feet below the sea surface here, and Mauna Loa, rising 13,667 feet above the sea, is a single volcanic mass almost 32,000 feet tall. It is Earth's largest such volcanic mountain, three million years in building. In the two centuries over which records have been kept, Mauna Loa has put new lava over only 160,000 acres, and Kilauea over 38,000 acres. They are the only active Hawaiian volcanoes now. Both go into long periods of inactivity. But they erupted simultaneously March 30, 1984, for the first time since 1868. In that series of eruptions, which began at Kilauea in January 1984, Mauna Loa, after nine quiet years, sent a finger of lava to within seven miles of Hilo, this island's largest city. Meantime, Kilauea squirted spectacular fountains of molten rock hundreds of feet into the air and sent lava flows downhill in 1983 that destroyed 18 homes on the upper slopes well away from where recent damage occurred. Then, on July 20, lava began to flow from new place in the East Rift Zone, a crater-lined crack along Kilauea's flank 2,000 feet above here, seven miles uphill. It was ''pahoehoe'' lava, with temperatures over 2,200 degrees. The Hawaiian word, pronounced pah-hoy-hoy, describes a lava that flows like heavy pudding. Another Hawaiian word, ''aa,'' pronounced ah-ah, describes the chunky lava that looks like coal fire cinders. Nothing seems to stop the lava. Firefighters in November sprayed water on the advancing toe of a flow moving at about 100 feet an hour. Water hardened the toe and diverted it from the Louis Pau home near here. But a week later a new flow destroyed the house. ''You can't stop it or hate it,'' said Mr. Pau, a retired ranger in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Over 100 families were evacuated from threatened areas but they have moved back since the flow stopped coming down the hill on Dec. 19. The new vent continues to exude about 650,000 cubic yards of lava a day, according to scientists. But now the material stays on the hill to build the growing dome over the vent. The lava that devastated the settlements down the hill traveled through tubes beneath the dome that are created as lava on the flow surface cools and hotter lava beneath flows faster. Chuck Humphrey, a freelance photographer who moved here eight years ago, discussed some of the economic aspects of the four-year eruption. ''I couldn't afford to live here if it weren't for the lava,'' he said. ''Lots in my subdivision sold for $13,000 and now they go at $4,000.'' He looked around at the store, church, and houses that make up this small settlement. He came here to pick up his mail from one of a few dozen lock boxes in an open-sided shed that offers shelter from the rain. ''I'd guess about 90 houses were built around here in eight years,'' he said. ''This may slow things.'' The lava flow has cut him off from his mailbox. His home is just three miles from here, but with the road blocked by five-foot thick lava, and he must now walk or drive 60 miles until the highway reopens. Where homes were overrun, all that remains are corrugated sheets that were roofs, metal furnishings not rescued in time, and upper portions of coconut palms and mango trees that still smoulder where they were burned away from their roots by the advancing lava. Some homes had old cars in the yards, and decorative fences of piled rock. These have been partly buried in lava. One had an oramental iron gate, now drooping and misshapen, its supporting posts distorted by the heat and shoved askew by the lava's weight. Of the walls and floors, nothing remains.
