208|1987\01\01|NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JANUARY 1, 1987|International|International International 2-5 The U.S. trade deficit rose to a record $19.2 billion in November after three months of improvement, the Commerce Department said. The department's chief economist called the figure ''horrendous.'' Page 1 The President praised the U.N. for adopting organizational changes. Mr. Reagan said he would ask Congress to end cuts in American donations that pushed the international organization close to bankruptcy. 1 1,019 Sandinista soldiers were killed and 1,798 were wounded in 1986, according to the Nicaraguan Government. It estimated that 4,000 United States-backed rebels had been killed and 2,600 wounded. 5 American optimism on arms control was expressed in a New Year's message by President Reagan to the Soviet people. He asserted that Moscow and Washington were closer now than ever before to an accord. 4 Mr. Reagan's address to Russians could be heard on some short-wave frequencies in Moscow, according to monitoring American diplomats. The Kremlin on Tuesday rejected any American-Soviet exchange of greetings. 4 Iran accused the U.S. of lacking ''good faith'' on returning $507.7 million in Iranian assets. Talks adjourned despite Teheran's seeing a settlement as near. Both sides said further meetings were planned. 2 The first disclosure of a link between Iranian arms shipments and Nicaraguan rebels reportedly came in a document that did not suggest any criminal activity, a senior Justice Department official said. 5 A 7.8 percent rise in foreign aid beyond the original request of $16.6 billion over the coming year is sought by the Reagan Administration, according to senior State Department officials. 2 South African whites will vote early next year, President P. W. Botha announced. Commentators said the move was designed to win a new mandate for the Afrikaner National Party, in power since 1948. 3 Cardinal O'Connor, diverging from Israeli views, said he would probably suggest to the Vatican that it consider taking the lead in calling an international conference to seek peace in the Middle East. 3 Chile will end state of siege 3 U.S. continues Honduras training 5 National 6-8 A fire killed dozens of tourists and injured scores as it raged through a packed luxury hotel in San Juan. Helicopters plucked guests off the roof of the 22-story hotel and many sought to escape on strings of sheets. 1 An airliner was shot at and a passenger was injured as the United Airlines jet was about to land at Raleigh-Durham Airport. The passenger, Barry Rollins, a 30-year-old New Yorker, was in stable condition. 1 The President, shifting water policy, is doubling to $12 billion his request to Congress for Federal spending to help communities build sewage treatment facilities, Administration officials said. 1 U.S. benefit program costs are rising much faster than expected, according to Congressional Budget Office estimates, in part apparently because of the states' expansion of social welfare programs. 8 Lawyers for three former teachers at the McMartin preschool in Los Angeles said they would appeal a judge's ruling that tossed out part of a civil suit because the women had filed it after a 100-day deadline. 7 Low-fat diets don't prevent cancer of the breast, according to a major new study based on the diets of nearly 90,000 American nurses. Breast cancer kills 1 of 11 American women. 6 Charitable giving has surged in the weeks before the new tax law takes effect today. Many organizations said contributors had acted to get maximum benefits under the expiring tax code. 41 William H. Rehnquist backs a raise of at least $50,000 a year for most Federal judges. In a year-end statement, Chief Justice Rehnquist said the pay increase was needed to attract ''first-rate talent.'' 8 One obstacle to the Carter Library, opposition to a road between Atlanta and the Presidential center, has been removed by a Federal District judge. However, other major local and state opposition continues. 6 A judge has denied a bias award totaling $4.3 million. The plaintiffs, 13 white Chicago police officers, contended in a Federal lawsuit that they had lost prestigious posts because of their race and politics. 6 New Mexico indians elect woman governor 7 Paper's contempt penalty voided 8 New California bishop 56 Washington Talk 8 What the year might bring  Regional 29-32 ''Pervasive'' racism exists in New York City, according to Mayor Koch and 23 black leaders who agreed to combat the situation. Earlier, lawyers for two black victims of an attack by whites criticized the police and prosecutors. 1 The Queens prosecutor, hindered by the refusal of the key prosecution witness to testify about a death, is considering asking Federal officials to prosecute the case as a civil rights violation. 1 A suspect in the murder of John Starkey, a 25-year-old student who was slain in Saltaire on Fire Island, has been named by the Suffolk County authorities after 13 months of investigations. 32 New York income taxes will be cut and New Yorkers will have the right to inspect their medical records and pay a fee for driving all terrain vehicles under some of the new laws that take effect today. 29 Cuomo planning more trips 29 25% of legislators miss transit vote 31 Homeless who work get help 31 State's leaders assume posts 31 ''Altar of Peace'' is dedicated 32 Neediest Cases 32
