209|1987\01\01|DOZENS ARE DEAD IN SAN JUAN AS BLASTS AND FIRE ENGULF BEACHFRONT TOURIST HOTEL|Fire raged through a packed high-rise hotel in the Condado Beach area this afternoon, killing dozens of tourists and injuring scores more.|Fire raged through a packed high-rise hotel in the Condado Beach area this afternoon, killing dozens of tourists and injuring scores more. Fire raged through a packed high-rise hotel in the Condado Beach area this afternoon, killing dozens of tourists and injuring scores more. Helicopters plucked guests off the roof of the 22-story hotel, the Dupont Plaza, until late tonight. Smoke continued to billow from the structure as the Puerto Rican authorities attempted to determine the number of casualties. ''We have so far about 40 dead people,'' said Daniel Velez, press secretary to Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon, and other officials and witnesses said the death toll could easily be higher. Explosions Reported ''There are many areas we have not been able to get into and don't know what we will find there,'' said Police Superintendent Jose Lopez Feliciano. Most of the bodies recovered after the fire were found in the lobby and casino, on the mezzanine level, and a restaurant on a lower level that serves a pool and the beach area. None of the victims were immediately identified. Without a full inspection of the interior, officials were not speculating on the cause of the fire, but a number of witnesses said they heard explosions at the time it broke out. The 450-room hotel, one of the largest tourist hotels in Puerto Rico, has a sprinkler system, but it was not immediately clear whether it had been working. Mr. Lopez Feliciano said the arson squad was investigating the fire and the reports of explosions. An agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation was also talking to hotel personnel. 'Big Burst of Smoke' A witness, Kevin W. Condon, of Ansonia, Conn., said there were at least 70 people in the casino when he was playing blackjack and somebody said there was smoke. ''But nobody paid any attention, and we continued playing,'' he said. ''Then there was a big burst of smoke and we went running toward one of the exits. When someone opened the door, we saw that the whole hallway was covered with black smoke. We slammed the door, went running toward the other exit and that was filled with black smoke. Then the panic began.'' He said he broke a window with a chair and jumped from the mezzanine level to the ground, breaking his left leg. He said later at Pavia Hospital that he had seen two other people escape out the window, ''but I don't think anybody else got out of there.'' Fire Chief Francisco Ortiz Soto said that at least 50 were believed killed on the casino level. John Lolli, of Wilkes-Barre, Pa., who was in the casino when the fire began, said, ''The heat was so intense that people had to crawl out on their hands and knees.'' The injured were taken to a number of different hospitals and it was impossible to get an accurate idea of how many people were hurt in the fire. The Rio Pedras Medical Center, was treating 23 to 25 victims, most suffering from smoke inhalation, said Dr. Juan Nazario. Six or seven were in critical condition and the others were in stable condition, he said. An estimated 125 people were evacuated from the hotel by 7 P.M., the Coast Guard said. By 11:30 P.M. the fire and smoke had stopped and the authorities had shut down their rescue operation for the night, without a clear notion of the number of casualties or the cause of the inferno. Union Meeting in Ballroom The blaze apparently started at 3:30 P.M. in a ground-floor ballroom, minutes after the room had been used by hotel employees affiliated with the teamsters' union, which was bargaining a new contract. No officials suggested any link between the fire and the union Jose Cadiz, a teamster official, said the union had nothing to do with the fire. ''I know a lot of people are going to accuse the teamsters,'' he said. ''It's natural that if there was an impasse, people would think the union would do anything, but the union is not crazy.'' A hotel spokesman, who asked not be identified, said that almost immediately after the fire broke out an explosion was heard in the casino on the mezzanine floor. Flames quickly gutted the lower floors, where most of the deaths were reported. The hotel spokesman said he had been told there were several other explosions, including one in the kitchen. The worst of the fire was confined to the lobby, the poolside restaurant, kitchen, casino and gift shops on the two lower floors. Some of the guests who made it out of the building moved around looking for their loved ones. New Yorkers Among the Rescued Alicia Knupfer of Flushing, N.Y., said she was in an 11th-floor room when she saw smoke outside the window and found the hallway filled with smoke. ''The elevators weren't working and I went into the stairway in which people were climbing up on the roof,'' she said at the Pavia Hospital tonight. ''We started climbing up and when we got to the roof a Puerto Rico International helicopter picked us up with a large basket.'' The smoke-filled stairways left frightened guests uncertain whether they would escape. ''We heard a voice above us yelling, 'Keep coming, keep coming, you're almost there,' said Natalie David, 43 years old, of Manhattan. ''Until then we thought we would never make it. It was so black with smoke we couldn't see anything.'' #4 Jersey Teen-Agers Unhurt The Associated Press interviewed several hotel guests from the New York area who escaped injury. Among them were four 17-year-olds from North Jersey, Anthony Cannon, Timothy Conway, Alberto Mascaro and Kevin Twomey, all high school students from Bergen who said they were in Puerto Rico to watch their basketball team compete. They said they were by the pool when they heard two loud noises and the shattering of glass. ''It took us a long time to realize what was happening,'' Timothy was quoted as saying. Others who told the A.P. that they had heard explosions were Murray Bates, a jewelry manufacturer from North Woodmere, L.I., and Dr. Hiram Morganstein, an optometrist from Englewood Cliffs, N.J.. ''All of a sudden I see smoke coming from the kitchen - we heard that bomb go off and an explosion,'' said Dr. Morganstein, who was in a cafeteria with his wife, Pearl, and 22-year-old daughter, Audrey. ''It sounded like a hand grenade going off.'' Shower of Broken Glass Alexander Leighton, the owner of the Casablanca guest house across the street from the hotel, said he was walking his dog on the beach when he saw smoke coming from the lower floors of the building at 3:26 P.M. Then he saw flames on the ground floors, he said. ''People were running out of the pool area bleeding from cuts from glass that showered the area,'' he said. ''Two croupiers came running across the pool area and jumped into the pool with their clothing smoldering.'' The hotel spokesman said the management of the hotel, which is owned by Hotel Systems International of Anaheim, Calif., met with the teamsters' union Tuesday night at the Department of Labor, where the hotel gave the union what it said would be its final offer. ''The union said they would not accept it but they came to us this morning and asked for the use of a ballroom so they could take the offer to the union membership,'' he said. ''We gave them use of the ballroom,'' he said. ''After the meeting broke up, the doors were locked and then someone yelled fire. Moments after that there was an explosion in the casino.''
