210|1987\01\01|BEIJING POLICE MOBILIZE TO PREVENT STUDENT PROTEST IN DEFIANCE OF BAN|The police blocked off much of Tiananmen Square today after posters at Beijing universities urged students to rally there New Year's Day to press their demands for political changes.|The police blocked off much of Tiananmen Square today after posters at Beijing universities urged students to rally there New Year's Day to press their demands for political changes. The police blocked off much of Tiananmen Square today after posters at Beijing universities urged students to rally there New Year's Day to press their demands for political changes. Policemen stood at intervals of about 16 feet along the outside edge of the vast, central square, while another line of people in civilian clothes encircled the Monument to the People's Heroes at the south end. On Wednesday night, hundreds of students clustered around illegal wall posters at Beijing University, discussing politics and a possible New Year's Day demonstration on the square. Warning Is Issued A city official warned that anyone ''who dares make trouble in the capital of our great socialist motherland and on sacred Tiananmen Square will be severely punished.'' His comments, carried in the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily, also accused the anti-Communist leadership of Taiwan of mobilizing ''secret agents'' to incite student demonstrators, the first time that charge has been made. The newly pasted-up wall posters at Beijing University accused the Government of failing to live up to its promises of democratic reform and urged students to take the lead in bringing freedom and democracy to China. A demonstration on Tiananmen Square would be the first Beijing rally by the students outside their isolated academic area in the northwest part of the capital. 'Attempt to Create Chaos' The municipal official, whose name was not used in the editorial statement, said ''a handful of elements hostile to the socialist system are planning to create disturbances on Tiananmen Square soon in an attempt to create chaos in Beijing, thus leading to nationwide chaos.'' Authorities say no arrests of students have been made so far in pro-democracy protests reported this month in at least 10 Chinese cities. Last Friday, following huge street marches in Shanghai and smaller ones in Beijing and elsewhere, Beijing authorities announced that those wanting to demonstrate must apply to police five days beforehand. The police said Wednesday that they received no requests for a demonstration at Tiananmen. The city also banned outright demonstrations at major sites such as the Great Hall of the People, right next to Tiananmen. One poster at Beijing University was signed in blood and called the present student movement ''epoch-making'' in significance. It said the Communist Party is fundamentally good but changes must be made in a nation where privilege still rules and peasants are regarded as subhuman. Students read the posters, which are banned, using flashlights and candles. Some recited the words into tape recorders, to be transcribed and passed on to other universities. Four or five large groups of students formed around individuals who were delivering speeches or debating various aspects of the democratic movement or the means students should take to support it. One student said students were under strong pressure from professors to stay away from the marches. Campaign Against Students Students have also been subject this past week to an increasingly vitriolic press campaign against their movement. The city official quoted on the front page of People's Daily on Wednesday said Taiwan's Voice of Free China radio on Dec. 17 instructed its special agents on the mainland to take ''unanimous actions at the appropriate time'' to abet the student protests. He said Taiwan has also told its agents ''to use various means to encourage and aid young students to bravely participate in the demonstrations.'' Wednesday's statement also attacked ''a certain foreign radio station'' for emphasizing the student demonstrations in ''inflammatory'' Chinese-language broadcasts. It apparently referred to Voice of America, which has a wide audience in China and for many students is a main source of news about other parts of the country. The same report said student unrest was being manipulated by ''a handful of elements hostile to socialism.''
