215|1987\01\01|Perkins to Tampa Bay|Ray Perkins resigned as coach of Alabama yesterday and said he would return to the National Football League as head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Perkins, who made an estimated $500,000 annually at Alabama in salary and endorsements as head football coach and director of athletics, would not disclose terms of his contract as Tampa|Ray Perkins resigned as coach of Alabama yesterday and said he would return to the National Football League as head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Perkins, who made an estimated $500,000 annually at Alabama in salary and endorsements as head football coach and director of athletics, would not disclose terms of his contract as Tampa Ray Perkins resigned as coach of Alabama yesterday and said he would return to the National Football League as head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Perkins, who made an estimated $500,000 annually at Alabama in salary and endorsements as head football coach and director of athletics, would not disclose terms of his contract as Tampa Bay's coach and vice president of operations, but published reports put it at $750,000 a year. The 45-year-old Perkins, whose resignation is effective immediately, apologized to his players for not being able to discuss the situation with them. ''I do so with mixed emotions,'' Perkins said of his resignation. Hugh Culverhouse, the owner of the Buccaneers, who is a native of Birmingham and an Alabama graduate, begun discussions last Monday with Perkins, who declined two years ago to compete for the Buccaneers' job. Culverhouse dismissed Leeman Bennett as coach of the Buccaneers following consecutive 2-14 seasons. Perkins's teams were 32-15-1 in his four years at Alabama. Before succeeding Bear Bryant at Alabama, Perkins coached the Giants for four years, achieving a 24-35 record and taking them to the playoffs in 1981, their first playoff spot in 18 years. His 1986 team at Alabama capped a 10-3 campaign by defeating Washington in the Sun Bowl on Christmas Day. Perkins said he would make a recommendation to the school's president, Joab Thomas, if he were asked, but he would not disclose his choice as a successor. SPORTS PEOPLE
