223|1987\01\01|New Executive Lineup Follows Pandick Buyout|A new management lineup, with Anthony K. Moulton as chief executive, is emerging at Pandick Inc., the New York-based financial printing company, after the completion of a management buyout this week.|A new management lineup, with Anthony K. Moulton as chief executive, is emerging at Pandick Inc., the New York-based financial printing company, after the completion of a management buyout this week. A new management lineup, with Anthony K. Moulton as chief executive, is emerging at Pandick Inc., the New York-based financial printing company, after the completion of a management buyout this week. Mr. Moulton, 42, is now the president of Pandick. Edward G. Green, 68, the chairman and chief executive, plans to retire. Another principal in the buyout, Garry L. Pote, 45, will continue as chief financial officer. ''I don't think we'll have a chairman's title,'' Mr. Pote said. ''Titles are not that important to Tony anyway.'' Mr. Moulton agreed. ''We work together so well as a team that we never had made a big deal about titles,'' he said. Mr. Moulton was speaking from Mr. Green's vacation home in the Adirondacks, where he was relaxing after the successful tender offer. The Charles P. Young Company, a unit of the Services Resources Corporation, withdrew from the bidding this week after it lost a court battle to block the management buyout, which involved 20 Pandick managers. Mr. Moulton is married to Mr. Green's daughter, Arden. They have a boy and a girl. Mr. Green's desire to retire set off plans in mid-September to buy the company and go private, Mr. Moulton said. ''After building up this company for 20 years, he said, 'I've had it,' and I said to him, 'I can't blame you.' '' The financial printing business is changing technologically and Pandick had taken diversification steps to get into new technology. But it has taken time for the strategy to pay off, Mr. Moulton said, and Wall Street's insistence on quarter-to-quarter performance made it difficult to remain a public company. ''The public stockholder pays a price for that,'' Mr. Pote said. ''It's not fair to the stockholder or management.'' Their plans were upset for a time by the rival offer to the buyout plan. ''We were not expecting any other bids,'' Mr. Moulton said. Mr. Moulton and Mr. Pote were both trained as investment bankers. Mr. Moulton joined Pandick 10 years ago from L. F. Rothschild, Unterberg, Towbin, and Mr. Pote joined in March after two years with the Banque National de Paris. BUSINESS PEOPLE
