225|1987\01\01|Ginnie Mae's President Lured Back to Nebraska|Glenn Wilson says he has mixed feelings about going home to Nebraska after two years in Washington as president of the Government National Mortgage Association.|Glenn Wilson says he has mixed feelings about going home to Nebraska after two years in Washington as president of the Government National Mortgage Association. Glenn Wilson says he has mixed feelings about going home to Nebraska after two years in Washington as president of the Government National Mortgage Association. ''I had just refinanced my house and started some construction and was planning to stay a while,'' Mr. Wilson said yesterday. Being part of the Reagan Administration and dealing with Wall Street and others has been exciting, he said, but he decided that he had an opportunity that was too good to pass by. Mr. Wilson has decided to quit Ginnie Mae, as it is called, to go to Omaha as president of the Firstier Mortgage Company, a unit of Firstier Inc., a bank holding company. ''I'm 48 years old,'' he said. ''At maximum I would have another two years here. When this opportunity came to head the largest mortgage banking company in Nebraska, I decided to take it. There are not going to be a lot of comparable oportunities.'' A large pay increase over his annual Government salary of $74,500 was ''part of the attraction,'' he said. ''But there are several other things. My children and grandchildren are in Nebraska. Almost all of my business and social friends are there, and my company and investments are in Nebraska.'' Mr. Wilson, a graduate of Baldwin-Wallace College in Berea, Ohio, was a developer and contractor in Grand Island, Neb., for 10 years, mostly in residential building. Before that he was national director of Young Republicans and later chairman of Nebraska Republicans. He directed President Reagan's election campaign in the state in 1980 and 1984. Ginnie Mae, which is part of the Housing and Urban Development Department, guarantees mortgage-backed securities made up of pools of mortgages. In its 17 years, Mr. Wilson said, the association has issued $263 billion in Ginnie Mae securities, with more than half written or rewritten during his tenure. Lower inflation and interest rates have given people the opportunity to refinance and buy new housing at a more affordable interest rate, he said. Mr. Wilson, a Presidential appointee, said no one had yet been indicated as his successor. ''The process is a relatively slow one,'' he said. Mr. Wilson joins the Nebraska bank Feb. 2. BUSINESS PEOPLE
