226|1987\01\01|How China's Leaders Use Student Protests|In virtually all the reports about the recent student demonstrations in China, little has been said of the restraint shown by the Chinese Communist Party. Given its tremendous power, China's one-party state could have easily nipped these demonstrations at the very beginning.|In virtually all the reports about the recent student demonstrations in China, little has been said of the restraint shown by the Chinese Communist Party. Given its tremendous power, China's one-party state could have easily nipped these demonstrations at the very beginning. In virtually all the reports about the recent student demonstrations in China, little has been said of the restraint shown by the Chinese Communist Party. Given its tremendous power, China's one-party state could have easily nipped these demonstrations at the very beginning. Yet, even as party leaders harshly denounced the demonstrators, they allowed a protest for a more open nominating process to peoples' congresses to expand into a more general demand for competitive elections and freedom of speech. The demonstrations spread for at least four weeks to China's major cities, including the capital. There are several reasons for the party's relative tolerance, including its desire to project a moderate image abroad; memories of the Cultural Revolution and a desire not to provoke another reign of terror by cracking down too harshly; and, most important, the fact that the demonstrations serve the interests of certain factions at the top levels of political leadership in ongoing debates over reform. Since the spring of 1986, the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, and his reform faction have called for political reforms to accompany economic changes. They argue that China's openness and economic development cannot be sustained unless the party decentralizes its power and reduces its role in economic management. Their attempt to gain acceptance of such a proposal at a Central Committee meeting last September was blocked by conservative leaders, led by the Politburo member and economic planner Chen Yun. The final resolution talked about building socialist spiritual civilization rather than reforming the political system. Nevertheless, the debate on politi cal reform continues and encompasses more radical suggestions. Some intellectuals insist political reform should not be merely a tool of economic reform. Others urge the party to lessen its role not only in the economy but also in the judiciary, the Government and everyday life. Although these recommendations and the student protests call for more far-reaching reforms than the Deng leadership seeks, Mr. Deng and his reform group use these protests to exert pressure on top leaders for their more limited reforms. This is not the first time they have done this. In the late 1970's, they allowed the so-called Democratic Movement to use wall posters, pamphlets and demonstrations to force out the remaining Maoists in the central leadership and to launch their own economic program. With Mr. Deng's goals achieved, he cracked down on democratic activists. A similar scenario may be unfolding today. In order to bring about limited political reform, the Deng leadership may have allowed student demonstrations to spread and capture the nation's attention. Yet after four weeks, he as well as the conservative leaders have gradually suppressed the protestors. If the demonstrations become too disruptive, the conservatives may use them as an excuse to call for an end or evena reversal of previous reforms, as they attempted to do in the ''spiritual pollution'' campaign in the fall of 1983. While the top leaders may be able to manipulate demonstrations for their own purposes, almost invariably the protests set in motion ideas and actions they cannot wholly control. In a similar fashion, Mao Zedong used the Red Guard demonstrations during the Cultural Revolution to purge the opposing political faction. His call ''to rebel against authority'' led to anarchy, which he finally suppressed with violence. But it also ultimately led to the Democratic Movement of the late 1970's. Although Mr. Deng initially used the Democratic Momement for his own purposes in the late 1970's, he too reined in the activists when they demanded more democratic rights than he was willing to allow. Yet their demands have stimulated the current debate on political reform. Even though the student demonstrations are now waning, China's recent history suggests that demonstrations, manipulated to exert pressure on the leaders at the top, ofter spark ideas and practices that the manipu-lators cannot fully extinguish.
