232|1987\01\02|BROADWAY|ANNE MILLER and Alexis Smith are now the frontrunners to replace Carole Channing and Mary Martin in ''Legends.'' If negotiations are successful, there will be a four-week hiatus when the current stars leave after the final performance in Palm Beach on Jan. 18. The new duo would begin rehearsals in mid-February for an opening ''somewhere'' the following month.|ANNE MILLER and Alexis Smith are now the frontrunners to replace Carole Channing and Mary Martin in ''Legends.'' If negotiations are successful, there will be a four-week hiatus when the current stars leave after the final performance in Palm Beach on Jan. 18. The new duo would begin rehearsals in mid-February for an opening ''somewhere'' the following month. ANNE MILLER and Alexis Smith are now the frontrunners to replace Carole Channing and Mary Martin in ''Legends.'' If negotiations are successful, there will be a four-week hiatus when the current stars leave after the final performance in Palm Beach on Jan. 18. The new duo would begin rehearsals in mid-February for an opening ''somewhere'' the following month. The eight-week interim would also allow further work on James Kirkwood's comedyabout two aging and battling film stars. Broadway? ''Absolutely, if the stars and the play work,'' said Edwin Gifford, the production's public-relations representative. There's something to be said for beginning the year with some humor. As a matter of fact, there's a lot to be said for it, because humor has it all over vitamins and egg creams when it comes to fortifying the spirit. A mom and pop who are drifting apart and a son who plays with dolls don't sound terribly amusing, but then we're not humorists like Michael Golder. Mr. Golder has written ''The Square Root of Three,'' which is billed as a comedy. It has a grandmother who is busy falling in love, and it received several awards when it was presented at the O'Neill Theater Center. Brian Drillinger, Sylvia Kauders and Larry Block are in the cast, and starting next Saturday it will be at the Jewish Repertory Theater, 344 East 14th Street (505-2667). On Wednesday, the Circle Repertory Company opens ''The Musical Comedy Murders of 1940,'' a comedy written and directed by a company member, John Bishop. This one has sliding panels, mistaken identities, a snowstorm, a stage-door slasher and maybe a Nazi spy, and they're all in preview at 99 Seventh Avenue South, at Fourth Street (924-7100). Three divorced men and a California Casanova sound promising, especially when James van Maanen, the playwright, has put the foursome under one roof. Out of this has come ''Better Living,'' with the goings-on to involve Richard Bowme, Tom Gerard, Gordon MacDonald and Charles Major. The opening is scheduled for Jan. 16 at the Stage Arts Theater Company, 120 West 28th Street (645-4526 or 279-4200). Not for another six weeks - but ''Donkey's Years'' by Michael Frayn is crossing the Atlantic. A bit of froth about a reunion of upper-class British college classmates, the play was considered one of the best comedies in Britain a decade ago. We'll be able to see how it has held up, and if it survives the transplanting, on Feb. 19, when it's slated for a New York premiere at the New Theater of Brooklyn, 465 Dean Street, in Prospect Heights (718-230-3366). If you think it's impossible to make something positive out of two single people alone in New York on a Saturday night, it doesn't much matter, because the plot takes second billing to the songs in ''Marry Me a Little.'' This musical pastiche of relatively unknown songs from Stephen Sondheim shows was originally presented Off Off Broadway in 1980, and will be at the York Theater Company as of Jan. 16. Some of the shows never saw the light of day; others that did - such as ''Follies,'' ''A Little Night Music'' and ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum'' - lost a number of their songs before their Broadway openings. Back to the lonely people. They'll be played by Liz Callaway and John Jellison and directed by Stephen Lloyd Helper. Craig Lucas and Norman Rene conceived and developed the show, which will be performed at 2 East 90th Street (534-5366). Talking about ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum,'' word is that Mickey Rooney will begin touring in it as of Feb. 27, starting in New Haven, continuing in such places as Boston and New Orleans and ending at the Westbury Music Fair on Long Island. Lee Guber, Shelly Gross and Bob Young are the people behind it, and you know the next line - ''if things go well, Broadway should follow.'' He comes from a district in England where the accents were once termed ''common'' (and for that matter, may still be), but meeting and listening to Roderick Cook, you'd never know it. ''When I was a child, the thing to do was learn the King's English,'' he said. ''It was also called BBC English because that was the way the announcers used to talk.'' What it's called now doesn't matter, he said, because English children today pay it no mind and generally talk like ''Neanderthals.'' Mr. Cook, who devised, directed and is co-starring in a revival of ''Oh Coward!,'' which is to close tomorrow night, said he was afraid his continued identification with the show had led people to think of him exclusively as an upper-class Englishman. ''I'm trapped in an image; it's a golden noose around my neck,'' he said. ''I sometimes feel like the Anthony Quinn of my set.'' Mr. Cook began acting and directing while a student at Cambridge, where he was, he said, ''part of the Cambridge set before it became the Cambridge set.'' Now, given his druthers, he'd like to give acting a pass and concentrate on writing and directing. At the moment, he's particularly interested in ''The Ninth Step,'' a ''five-character, one-set and four-handkerchief'' drama by Tom Ziegler, a new writer, and in ''Star Time,'' a musical he's written with William Roy. The latter, he said, is an homage to 1940's movies. ''It's as if we were given Betty Grable, Eve Arden, Phil Silvers and John Payne, and 20th Century-Fox said, 'Go,' '' Mr. Cook said. ''I think 'Star Time' would do for the 1940's what 'The Boy Friend' did for the 1920's.'' It would, that is, if it got produced. But as someone once said, theater is made up of dreams that come true. Despite what some people think - because he usually has his 10 fingers in 50 pies - there's only one Joseph Papp, at least at the New York Shakespeare Festival and the Public Theater. Mr. Papp's latest project is an oral history that will explore his life in the theater through three decades of controversy and celebration. It will also include firsthand accounts from the people who made the festival come to life - stagehands, performers, politicians and corporate leaders. The history, which will be written with the journalist Kenneth Turan, is to be published in hard cover by Bantam Books in 1989. Why another book on theater? Mr. Papp knew you'd ask. ''People might have asked why another theater when we started 30 years ago,'' he said. ''But we proved we had something different to offer, and I'm confident the book will do the same.''
