233|1987\01\02|ART: 17 EARLY PAINTINGS BY GERHARD RICHTER|THE exhibition of Gerhard Richter's early work at the Barbara Gladstone Gallery (99 Greene Street) reveals only the tip of the iceberg of this West German artist's polymorphous production. Nonetheless, the 17 paintings on view (through Jan. 17), made between 1964 and 1974, constitute the largest group of Richter's work from this period ever exhibited in New York.|THE exhibition of Gerhard Richter's early work at the Barbara Gladstone Gallery (99 Greene Street) reveals only the tip of the iceberg of this West German artist's polymorphous production. Nonetheless, the 17 paintings on view (through Jan. 17), made between 1964 and 1974, constitute the largest group of Richter's work from this period ever exhibited in New York. THE exhibition of Gerhard Richter's early work at the Barbara Gladstone Gallery (99 Greene Street) reveals only the tip of the iceberg of this West German artist's polymorphous production. Nonetheless, the 17 paintings on view (through Jan. 17), made between 1964 and 1974, constitute the largest group of Richter's work from this period ever exhibited in New York. They provide important background material on an artist who, despite his considerable reputation, is something of an enigma here. During the period covered by this show, European painting was not getting a lot of play in New York; Conceptual Art and Process Art were the imports of choice. Richter, who was born in Dresden in 1932 and emigrated from East to West Germany in 1961, had his first one-person show in Dusseldorf in 1963; but he did not have a solo exhibition in New York until 1978. At that point he proceeded to become quite well known for big, hotly colored gestural abstractions (which always managed to be oddly photographic in their spatial effects) and for photo-based landscapes and paintings of lighted candles. This exhibition establishes that the polarities of Richter's art have long been the photographic image at one extreme and pure painting, as material and process, at the other. And it shows several of the ways Richter has worked back and forth between the two, in the process irrevocably blurring the distinction between abstraction and representation, as have many other artists his age and younger. Richter emerges here as an artist who fits in at several points in the terrain of American art; his work relates to Photo-Realism, Pop Art and Minimalism. He is also an early appropriator, for the most part using only existing images and configurations in his work. When he wants to paint a landscape, Richter copies a page from a guidebook onto a canvas, captions and all. ''Egyptian Landscape'' of 1964 gives us four views of ancient sites isolated on a ground of creamy white paint as if on a big page. This painting brings to mind the 1960's transcriptions of shipboard postcards by Malcolm Morley, who also brought a distinctly cerebral edge to Photo Realism. When Richter makes an abstract painting, it, too, often has a real-life source: two of the abstract paintings here are based on enlarged copies of a paint company's color charts, reproducing exactly the hard shiny look of paint chips. Left to his own devices, without an image to work from, Richter can emphasize process to the exclusion of all else. ''Gray,'' a painting that is not as interesting to look at as most others here, but that provides important clues to Richter's sensibility, is simply a large canvas covered with thick brushstrokes of gray paint. Richter balances most precisely the two extremes of his art in ''Townscape PL'' of 1970. Here, working from an aerial view of a city, he creates a sloshy network of grisaille brushstrokes that, without yielding precise information, leave no question about the image's source. Everywhere precise depiction is alluded to and then thwarted. A favorite device is to pull what artists call a blending brush across a realistic image so that it acquires a horizontal blur, reminding us that the image is paint, nothing but paint. This occurs in the aforementioned ''Egyptian Landscape,'' in the 1971 portrait of Brigid Polk (done from a Polaroid photo) and in the particularly wonderful ''Alfa Romeo (With Text)'' of 1965. Here the blurring of the car's image makes the vehicle seem to be moving, a suggestion of speed that contrasts absolutely with the slow methodical painting of the text that fills the left side of the canvas. In other paintings, especially the 1967 ''Lamp'' and the 1969 ''Sea Piece (Gray-Green, Cloudy),'' it is the depiction of light that blurs and distorts the image, reminding us once more of its painted state. This is a show that starts out cold but ends up rather hot, and it is Richter's attention to the various painted states of his images that raises the temperature. His impersonal coolness is so consistent that it has become the unifying characteristic of his highly diverse art, and this is understandable. But spend some time with these paintings, and their coolness gives way to a workmanlike but subtly impassioned rendering in which research and improvisation meet and the hand has its say. Also of interest this week: Richard Tuttle (Blum Helman, 20 West 57th Street): Richard Tuttle's scrappy little wall sculptures, fashioned out of cardboard, Styrofoam and bits of wire and wood and then brightly painted, continue to be an affront to well-made, heavy, expensive-looking art, of which there is much these days. On first encounter, Tuttle's delicate constructions could be the work of an exceptionally talented child or naive artist; they seem to be the kind of work that even a mother might inadvertently toss out. But second or third encounters overturn these impressions and suggest that Tuttle is pursuing his own eccentric brand of Minimalism, a highly individualized argument concerning how less can be more both esthetically and ecologically. His ''less'' lies in his use of materials that are modest, inartistic and virtually biodegradable, in his avoidance of overt craftsmanship and in his reliance on an intimate scale that brings the viewer up close to his works. His ''more'' emanates from his vibrant color, the energetic quirkiness of his forms, and the unexpected way these structures, so seemingly abstract, coalesce into semi-legible images: his ship at sea, a red-roofed house beside a row of trees, a possible parrot. Underlying all this seems to be the insistence that valuable visual perceptions should have as little as possible to do with obvious measures of value. Thus an art that seems to be purely formal and exceedingly poetic comes around to the political by the back door. (Through tomorrow.) ''Text and Image: The Wording of American Art'' (Holly Solomon Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street): This is an exhibition of some 40 artists who, one way or another, have incorporated language into their art. It spans the generations from Stuart Davis and Robert Motherwell through Jasper Johns and Nancy Graves to such recently emerged East Village talents as Peter Nagy and Tim Rollins and K.O.S. Along the way, styles as diverse as Pop, Conceptual and graffiti art are represented. Although it comes on like a year's-end hodgepodge, it adds up to a rather carefully selected survey. Words, it turns out, have served American artists well, and vice-versa. Some of them, such as Jenny Holzer, Jonathan Borofsky and William Wegman, use words to tell a story or deliver a message. Others, such as Davis and Judy Pfaff, use single words for their decorative, streetwise punch. Still others do a little of both -Barbara Kruger, Ed Ruscha, Robert Indiana and Neil Jenney, in particular. In certain extreme instances, such as the work of Lawrence Weiner and Joseph Kosuth, what you read is what you get (to paraphrase Frank Stella). In their pieces, language is used almost as abstractly as the black square in a painting by Malevich. The exhibition's highlights are many, and include the Davis painting ''Untitled (Variation on Pochade),'' a late work in which his usual jostling forms are outlined in black on bare white canvas; Larry Rivers's endearing ''Brushed Camel'' (after the cigarette), and, of particular interest, a little-known painting from 1968 by John Baldessari. Titled ''A 1968 Painting,'' it combines its name with a grisaille rendition of a Stella protractor painting; from certain angles, especially a post-Modernist one, this work looks extremely up to date. (Through tomorrow.)
