235|1987\01\02|RESTAURANTS|A YACHT club on the industrial waterfront of Queens may seem as improbable as a polo field on Wall Street, but there it sits, all cool-white and glassy, offering a stunning panorama of midtown Manhattan across the East River. What's more, the club's recently revamped public restaurant, called Water's|A YACHT club on the industrial waterfront of Queens may seem as improbable as a polo field on Wall Street, but there it sits, all cool-white and glassy, offering a stunning panorama of midtown Manhattan across the East River. What's more, the club's recently revamped public restaurant, called Water's A YACHT club on the industrial waterfront of Queens may seem as improbable as a polo field on Wall Street, but there it sits, all cool-white and glassy, offering a stunning panorama of midtown Manhattan across the East River. What's more, the club's recently revamped public restaurant, called Water's Edge, can be surprisingly good. The young chef, Gregory Godon, formerly of La Cote Basque, turns out an ambitious - perhaps too ambitious at times - range of seafood, game and meat entrees, some peppered with a Cajun touch. The service is a little wobbly at times, and prices are hardly provincial (count on about $50 a person with wine); but if you seek generally pleasing fare in a romantic waterside setting, Water's Edge is worth adding to your ports of call. The gentrified main room is a curious mix of sleek marine white and somber men's club oak that was imported to lend an air of seriousness to the space. The result, though, is a jarring hodgepodge. Severe, high-backed Victorian-style chairs add to the dignified discomfort. Tables are generously spaced to allow privacy. An upstairs banquet room seats 600. By sticking to the most straightforward preparations and avoiding whimsical sauces and pastas, you should do fine. One could start with potent dill-infused gravlax or superior smoked tuna accompanied by lemon, capers and a mild horseradish-cream sauce. My favorite appetizer is called Cape Cod chili. It is an unlikely combination of beans, lobster, shrimp and scallops in a rousing hot sauce foiled with a touch of sweetness from the onions. Grilled peppered salmon sounded tempting but was overcooked. Common sense told me to steer away from pesto when basil was out of season, but professional duty dictated otherwise. Skip it. Gnocchi in a supercharged garlic-tomato sauce was about as delicately subtle as a supertanker, advisable only for the most ardent garlic fans. The chef is conscientious about the quality of his seafood, and it is best when garnished least. Among the recommended dishes are a thick plank of grilled yellowfin tuna painted with sweetish hoisin sauce, sauteed Dover sole garnished with rings of sweet red peppers, and an exceptionally zesty rendition of blackened snapper - it was zippy with pepper but not burned, as it so often is elsewhere. Poached salmon was cooked to a turn, but its lobster sauce, speckled with black truffles, was utterly bland; the same fate met sauteed lobster meat under a lavalike cream sauce purportedly seasoned with sea urchin. All entrees are served with rice and tasty firm-cooked julienne of carrots. The wine list is scattered and uneven, but there are enough reasonably priced bottles to meet most needs. One vexing service practice is that after pouring the wine, waiters place the bottle in a storage bucket far from your table. Invariably, when you want some wine, no one is around to retrieve it. Simple steaks and chops are reliably good; two exceptional entrees are the rack of lamb over well-seasoned hot lentils, and a special, venison steak in a faintly sweet stock sauce replete with meaty shiitaki mushrooms. For dessert, you can't go wrong with the splendid tarte tatin featuring caramelized apples and almond slivers, excellent pecan pie built on a layer of bittersweet chocolate, or rich and intense chocolate mousse cake. Amaretto cream cake is lightweight and excessively sweet, while cheesecake is dry and commercial-tasting. You don't need a yacht to partake in this club -the subway will get you there. For a change of pace and crow's-nest views, I suggest you make the crossing. What the Upper West Side sorely needs is an authentic French brasserie. It should be a bright and bustling place that is open at all hours, serves wholesome and unfussy fare and good table wines and provides snappy service. That is not what the neighborhood got when Brasserie Bijou opened two months ago in the former Ruelle's on Columbus Avenue. It looks like a brasserie, all right, with its airy belle epoque interior sporting lots of brass and glass, cane chairs, twirling fans and Ionic columns. A central staircase makes a dramatic sweep to a second-floor dining room. Even the service staff in long white aprons fits the part. The downfall is the menu, which carries too many dishes that are barely a notch above run-of-the-mill Columbus Avenue pub grub. This is all the more surprising because the owners, who had a timely idea in converting undistinguished Ruelle's into something more exciting, recruited as chef Shirley King, formerly of Wilkinson's Seafood Cafe. Perhaps the burden of high-volume cooking at this busy new place is taking its toll, or maybe the kitchen staff is unsteady; whatever, out of some dozen meals sampled, more than half were disappointing. Appetizers are slightly better than main courses. Baked mussels stuffed with basil-and-garlic butter are aromatic and fresh, and the house terrine is well turned out, rough textured and full flavorerd. Another winner is snails nestled against a cloud of puff pastry surrounded by a moat of light garlic cream sauce dotted with chopped endive. Don't bother with the tasteless salad over artichoke bottoms in a supermarket-quality dressing; the kitchen's attempt to replicate a popular French salad combining lettuce, bacon and poached egg is a sodden mess - even the poached egg is overcooked. A special soup of the day, blending potatoes, ham and cabbage, was a near miss - all it needed was a bit of seasoning to offset the salty ham. The young service staff is doing its best under fire, and it manages to keep the pace moving along. The wine list is well chosen and moderately priced; plenty of good selections can be found for less than $20. Lack of seasoning drags down many of the seafood entrees. A seafood cassoulet with French flageolet beans served in a crock was viscous and bland; on two occasions hefty grilled shrimp were perfectly cooked but the advertised wasabi-mustard-and-ginger sauce must have evaporated on the way from the kitchen. Grilled swordfish, a special, was moist and tasty with its backdrop of mixed Oriental vegetables. I would play it safe and avoid pastas, based on the one I sampled - a cloying and oversalted blend of cream, smoked salmon and salmon roe. On the landlubber side of the menu, grilled baby lamb chops in a light thyme sauce were right on the mark, pink, buttery tender and accompanied by a crispy potato cake. A soothing winter special was pot-au-feu combining tender, sinewy beef brisket, cabbage, carrots and potatoes. Coarse salt and horseradish came with it. On the debit side are a remarkably tasteless steak and limp french fries and the dry veal with chestnut puree. Aside from a good buttery almond cake, most of the desserts are not worth the guilt. The Upper West Side needs another overstriving French restaurant about as much as Central Park needs a condominium development. Brasserie Bijou has the potential to turn around, and for all those nocturnal Francophiles, it would be welcome indeed. Water's Edge * East River Yacht Club, 44th Drive at the East River, Long Island City, Queens, (718) 482-0033. Atmosphere: Great views, mismatched decor. Well-spaced tables. Romantic. Service: Polite and eager but green and lacking professionalism at times. Recommended dishes: Gravlax, Cape Cod chili, smoked tuna, blackened red snapper, sauteed Dover sole, yellowfin tuna, rack of lamb with lentils, venison, chocolate mousse cake, tarte tatin, pecan pie. Price range: Lunch: appetizers $4.50 to $8.50, main courses $8.50 to $14.50; dinner: appetizers $7.50 to $10; entrees $18 to $27. Credit cards: All major credit cards. Hours: Lunch: noon to 3 P.M, Monday to Friday; dinner: 6 to 11 P.M. Monday to Friday, 6 to 11 P.M. Saturday, 5 to 11 P.M. Sunday; Sunday brunch: noon to 3 P.M. Reservations: Suggested.  Brasserie Bijou Satisfactory 321 Columbus Avenue, at 75th Street, 799-5100. Atmosphere: Airy and glittery brasserie feeling. Service: Young and energetic. Recommended dishes: Baked mussels, snails with puff pastry, house terrine, grilled swordfish, grilled lamb chops, pot-au-feu. Price range: Lunch: all dishes from $3.50 to $8; dinner: appetizers $3.50 to $10, main courses $7.95 to $18.50. Credit cards: All major cards. Hours: Lunch: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Monday to Saturday; dinner: 5 to 11 P.M. daily, cafe menu 11 P.M. to 1:30 A.M. daily; Sunday brunch: 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. Reservations: Necessary. ---- What the stars mean: (None)Poor to satisfactory *Good **Very good ***Excellent ****Extraordinary These ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambiance and service taken into consideration. Prices and menus are subject to change.
