239|1987\01\02|What's So Good About Traditional Male Violence?; Cultural Bias in Action|To the Editor:|To the Editor: To the Editor: Perhaps the most disturbing aspect of your article on boyhood effeminacy and later homosexuality is the refusal to question any of the premises upon which Dr. Green bases his study of 44 ''sissy boys.'' This pejorative and objectionable term reflects Dr. Green's dependence on a retrograde vocabulary and culturally imposed attitudes, which both the feminist and gay-rights movements of the last two decades have fought so hard to amend. Equally disturbing, you never attempt to place the study in the context of the longstanding sociological and psychological debate about rigid, traditional gender roles and a felicitous childhood development. The study grandly generalizes from a very small sample of young boys who ''persistently act like girls.'' Your reporter bandies about phrases like ''more conventional masculine behavior'' and ''gender-appropriate'' activities, yet spends no time - as neither, one assumes, did Dr. Green - questioning the cultural meanings ascribed to such words. For what is ''conventional'' or ''gender-appropriate'' is always a judgment made within a specific cultural context, Occidental or Oriental, rural or urban. One unspoken conclusion in the article is that to be ''effeminate'' as a boy, posing as it does the hidden threat of future homosexuality, is always a negative. To be ''like a girl'' is likewise proved a constant cultural minus when Dr. Green remarks that tomboys - girls who act like boys -''are treated by society as normal girls.'' Thus, what is normal and better is the perceived ''masculine'' tendency; the ''feminine'' one is viewed as inferior, a negative. Simone de Beauvoir in ''The Second Sex'' argued this case far more completely nearly 30 years ago, yet Dr. Green and your reporter use their terms with not the least irony. Nor does your reporter place in context the arena of behavioral vs. biological vs. cultural gender-role battles fought over the last 20 years, thanks largely to a feminist refusal to accept entrenched social attitudes that limit the realization of each child's full human potential. Neither Dr. Green nor your writer uses words like tenderness, trust, honesty, selflessness, valor or generosity to discuss gender-neutral values whose importance to childhood development should override culturally imposed boy-girl patterns. There is no indication to show what Dr. Green's study finds noble in such traditional boyhood ''masculine'' activities as ''rough and tumble'' play bordering on physical aggression, make-believe war games and male group dynamics, where survival of the fittest is a measure of ''masculine'' prowess and control. The issue is always seen through but one end of the telescope, for the study as described, though it does not blame ''effeminate'' boys, seeks to show why they ''have difficulty making friends with the other boys'' when it would be equally valuable to know why ''other boys'' are not encouraged to make friends with them. Finally, the article is evidence of the frightened need in our society for so-called ''experts'' to quantify, analyze, record and interpret the lives of gay men and lesbians. But your reporter includes not one response from a gay man or lesbian. We have a great deal to teach others about tolerance, love and friendship. Millions are spent to reassure the worried parent that ''it's not really your fault,'' but not one cent goes to research the persistent cultural phobia that kills and maims, physically and spiritually, and produces destructive sexual bigots, first among children, then among the adults they grow into. ALLEN ELLENZWEIG  New York, Dec. 17, 1986  The writer is executive administrator of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation.
