241|1987\01\02|AUCTIONS|DID Capt. John Tittle bring back two large Swedish earthenware trays, awash with images of Roman ruins, from his European voyages in the 1780's - and did he then have Chippendale table bases made for them? Were tray-top tables all the rage in the late 18th century in Beverly, Mass., where he lived?|DID Capt. John Tittle bring back two large Swedish earthenware trays, awash with images of Roman ruins, from his European voyages in the 1780's - and did he then have Chippendale table bases made for them? Were tray-top tables all the rage in the late 18th century in Beverly, Mass., where he lived? DID Capt. John Tittle bring back two large Swedish earthenware trays, awash with images of Roman ruins, from his European voyages in the 1780's - and did he then have Chippendale table bases made for them? Were tray-top tables all the rage in the late 18th century in Beverly, Mass., where he lived? These are some of the questions raised this week in advance of the auction today of a curious tray table, which is like one that was once owned by Captain Tittle and that now dominates an alcove at the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum in Delaware. The sale begins at 10 A.M. at the Robert W. Skinner gallery in Bolton, Mass. ''I think there is no question that they are companions,'' Albert Sack, the New York dealer, said this week of the two look-alike tables. ''There may have been others - but so far only two have surfaced. The table at Skinner's is a rarity - a great rarity. It belongs in an important collection. The table has the original finish; you can't fault it.'' In 1964, when Henry du Pont purchased the tray-table that's now at the Winterthur Museum, only his version was known. Nancy Goyne Evans, senior registrar at the museum, recalled this week that she researched the table and found that the bright pink faience top was probably made at Rorstrand, a factory near Stockholm. She said that Captain Tittle made many European voyages and visited Sweden at least once, in 1788. ''They come from the same design sources,'' she said of the two ceramic trays, adding that the one at Skinner differs in several minor ways - the top is polychromed and has a different picture of ancient ruins. Mrs. Evans said that both of the mahogany tables were made by a sophisticated craftsman. ''You can see how the cabinetmaker picks up on the rounded corners of the tray and follows this through in the shaping of the frame, the lip of the table, and the legs,'' she said. ''There is this magnificent coordination. The maker was not any country yokel.'' Both tables descended in Massachusetts families. The Skinner version was owned in the 19th century by Augustus Flagg, who became president of Little, Brown & Company in 1869 and died in 1903. The widow of Flagg's great-grandson, whose name has not been disclosed, is the consignor of the table, according to Skinner's. Stephen Fletcher, Skinner's furniture specialist, was at Winterthur this week checking out the similarities and differences between the two tables. Mr. Fletcher said that the table in the sale had handles on the side and that the pierced detailing differed slightly on the two tables. At Tittle's death in 1800, an inventory listed a table presumed to be the one at Winterthur as ''cover'd with China'' and valued at $4.50. Winterthur officials decline to disclose what Mr. du Pont paid for the museum's table. Skinner expects that the one up for sale will bring between $60,000 and $80,000. Elsholz Collection Of Glass Pieces American glass enthusiasts were out in force last month at the Richard A. Bourne galleries in Hyannis, Mass., attending the two-day sale of William J. Elsholz's collection of early-19th-century works. The assemblage of 700 clear and brilliantly colored glass vessels, whale-oil lamps and decorations represents one-third of the Elsholz collection, which experts have described as one of the most important to be auctioned in recent years. Mr. Elsholz, a Detroit accountant and pioneer collector of this period of glass, began acquiring pieces in 1930 and continued until shortly before his death last June at the age of 93. The remainder of the collection of more than 2,000 pieces will be sold in May and next fall at Bourne. Major examples of pressed, free-blown and mold-blown glass, produced between 1815 and 1860 by factories throughout New England, the mid-Atlantic states and the Middle West, brought extraordinary prices at the auction, which totaled $717,000. Among the most desirable selections were lacy, lily-pad, hobnail and ripple-patterned works. According to Richard A. Bourne, interest in this glass has changed dramatically in recent years. At the peak of Mr. Elsholz's collecting, he said, prices were much lower and there were many more competitors. ''Virtually everyone who buys today was here,'' the auctioneer said, noting that the gathering was relatively small - about 200 collectors and dealers. There were also fewer telephone bids and order bids from absentee buyers than is usually the case at his sales, he reported. Stuart Feld of Hirschl & Adler, the New York dealers, was a major buyer, acquiring several of the most important works. He bought the largest known free-blown pitcher in lily-pad decoration, a globular-shaped aquamarine glass vessel that holds four quarts. He paid $19,000, a record at auction for lily-pad patterned glass. Mr. Feld also purchased a rare glass bank that looks more like a brandy bottle than a coin repository, from its stopper-like ball at the top on which a glass chicken perches, to its footed base. The 11-inch-tall free-blown vessel, which has a coin buried in the nob-top and in the ball at the base, is the only known survivor of this egg-shaped form. It was sold for $6,500, almost three times what such banks usually bring. Mr. Feld said he bought these and other glass items for his new gallery, Hirschl & Adler Folk, which will open in April at 851 Madison Avenue, at 70th Street. The second-floor gallery, adjoining Mr. Feld's Hirschl & Adler Modern, will be under the direction of Frank J. Miele, a lawyer and folk-art collector. A brilliant blue vegetable dish on a hexagonal base was purchased by Nancy O. Merrill, curator of glass at the Chrysler Museum in Norfolk, Va., for $17,000, a record price at auction for sandwich glass. J. Garrison Stradling, a New York glass dealer, purchased several window panes that were produced before the Civil War to be inset in doors and partitions. These are scarce items in the marketplace, he said, adding that the rarest and most expensive of these pressed-glass designs was made in Pittsburgh. The 7-inch-by-5-inch pane of stylized tulips framing elaborate S-scrolls brought $9,000. ''It is the only one extant as far as I know,'' Mr. Stradling said. ''A lot of the Elsholz collection is very esoteric material. I wondered whether there would be enough money to support this sale in glass. The serious buying proved that there are buyers for the best.''
