243|1987\01\02|MOMIX DANCE TROUPE: SURREALISTIC IMAGES|Moses Pendleton was having a chat the other day in the staid lobby of the Algonquin Hotel when he suddenly whipped out a camera, detonated a flashbulb and took the photograph of an unsuspecting man across the room, who was quietly reading a newspaper.|Moses Pendleton was having a chat the other day in the staid lobby of the Algonquin Hotel when he suddenly whipped out a camera, detonated a flashbulb and took the photograph of an unsuspecting man across the room, who was quietly reading a newspaper. Moses Pendleton was having a chat the other day in the staid lobby of the Algonquin Hotel when he suddenly whipped out a camera, detonated a flashbulb and took the photograph of an unsuspecting man across the room, who was quietly reading a newspaper. ''Lip-synching,''Mr. Pendleton intoned, pointing out that the man was moving his lips. ''It's an image I'd like to study at home.'' The man across the room never noticed, but it was a telling moment for Mr. Pendleton, 37 years old, the artistic director of Momix, a dance company whose choreography revolves around perpetually shifting imagery. Not long from now, moving lips might well appear in one of Mr. Pendleton's ballets. Tomorrow night Momix opens at the 92d Street Y with an eclectic pastiche that includes two partly nude dancers whose movements are confined because they are wearing downhill skis; a man who cannot move without a mammoth gyroscope; a woman encased in a dress that never touches her skin; dancers trapped in a giant shell, and a man on stilts who transforms himself into the steeple of a church. 'A Form of Surrealism' ''Momix deals with shifting identities,'' said Mr. Pendleton, who lives and works in a 30-room mansion in Washington, Conn. ''It's a form of Surrealism in which you might see a woman on the body of a cat.'' Mr. Pendleton, who was the co-founder of Pilobolus - the dance troupe founded at Dartmouth College in 1971 and known for its ability to create illusions and intricate metaphors out of body shapes - said he saw Momix as an outgrowth of that earlier company. Pilobolus, which was co-founded by Jonathan Wolken, was originally composed of such dancers as Martha Clarke, Robby Barnett, Alison Chase and Michael Tracy, all of whom have since gone their separate ways. Mr. Pendleton founded Momix in 1980 and named it after a solo he did for Pilobolus in which he wore a dramatic white outfit and Panama hat. If there was any key difference between Pilobolus and his current company of about 10 dancers, Mr. Pendleton said, it was that Pilobolus featured choreography requiring a collective effort by dancers, whereas Momix emphasizes the solo performance. ''It's almost opposite of the group works of Pilobolus,'' Mr. Pendleton said, adding quickly that he disliked describing what Momix was because its identity was always changing and fluidity was at the dance company's core. Time With His Daughter Mr. Pendleton said he did not know from one moment to the next whether he would continue to perform. Although he still loves to dance, he hates to travel, and since performance is synonymous with travel he prefers to stay at home, dance in front of the fireplace and compose new works. Photography has become a major new interest, Mr. Pendleton said, as has spending time with his 6-month-old daughter, Quinn Elizabeth Pendleton, and her mother, the Momix dancer Cynthia Quinn. ''Dancing for me was always mostly child's play,'' said Mr. Pendleton, speaking of his daughter. ''She reminds me of that.'' With that, he reached for a tape recorder. He said he wanted not only to remember what he said, but also to be able to ponder it. ''Unlike Pilobolus, the extension in Momix is not into another body but a prop,'' Mr. Pendleton said. ''Like a clamshell opening and closing as being an extension of a yawn.'' Expanding on the importance of props in his works, Mr. Pendleton then described the beginnings of an idea for a new work he said would be called ''TV Man.'' It was conceived, he said, with a longtime friend, the psychologist Dr. Robert Beck, and will be composed of some kind of creature whose giant head is a television monitor. 'Everything Is a Gimmick' ''Imagine Ian McKellen performing Shakespeare,'' he said. ''He's this size but his head is. . . .'' Mr. Pendleton extended his hands, showing a head twice the size of his own. ''I'm not sure yet if it will be a dance or whether he or she might be in the lobby selling Momix cassettes,'' Mr. Pendleton said. ''Instead of T-shirts maybe he'll sell bags of compost. It could catch on. It would be a joke, but jokes are recognition that once you're out of the taxicab, you're in the theater.'' Mr. Pendleton, who admittedly loves to talk, checked to see whether his tape recorder was working. It was. ''Everything is a gimmick at first,'' he said. ''Then it grows. What is that TV man? What does he say? Does it dance? Maybe the body is primitive. Primal. Is it out of Egypt? Maybe it's an extension of your memory. At one point you can have a female head. A woman's body. Then a male's head. Is it an oval mirror? Can we cloak it properly? Make it medieval? Maybe it's a strange piece of sculpture that has a TV set as an eye.'' Stay tuned.  Momix will perform at the Y (Lexington Avenue at 92d Street) tomorrow at 8 P.M., Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M., and Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M. Tickets are $16. Information: 996-1100.
