245|1987\01\02|WALKER AND STROLLER COME IN FROM THE COLD|NEW YORK in January is anything but a winter wonderland, as winds gain tornado force at skyscraper corners and sweep the streets clean of sidewalk vendors, bicycle messengers and pedestrians. In winter, the midtown streets, deep in holiday blahs and shorn of adornment, are for brisk movement rather than serendipitous dawdling - and thoughts turn to the great public interiors that serve as idyllic refuges.|NEW YORK in January is anything but a winter wonderland, as winds gain tornado force at skyscraper corners and sweep the streets clean of sidewalk vendors, bicycle messengers and pedestrians. In winter, the midtown streets, deep in holiday blahs and shorn of adornment, are for brisk movement rather than serendipitous dawdling - and thoughts turn to the great public interiors that serve as idyllic refuges. NEW YORK in January is anything but a winter wonderland, as winds gain tornado force at skyscraper corners and sweep the streets clean of sidewalk vendors, bicycle messengers and pedestrians. In winter, the midtown streets, deep in holiday blahs and shorn of adornment, are for brisk movement rather than serendipitous dawdling - and thoughts turn to the great public interiors that serve as idyllic refuges. Sometimes they feature entertainment or exhibitions, but whatever else they offer, they are warm, usually bright and clean enclaves ideal for resting while en route elsewhere, or as the meeting place that substitutes for a street corner or park where one would rendezvous in milder climate. This was the matter under discussion by those two inveterate city prowlers, Weekend Walker and City Stroller, who were indeed making an issue of it as they occupied a table at one such haven, the Horn & Hardart Original Automat, at the corner of 42d Street and Third Avenue. They were vigorously debating the merits of hotel lobbies against the virtues of atriums as places where one might enjoy a respite from the outdoors, at a reasonable price, which, by the standards of this canny and streetwise pair, means that they are free. The two argued on class lines - Walker the patrician, Stroller the proletarian - as they warmed themselves with coffee they had just cranked out of the automat spigot, which was activated by a coin. Both men were grateful for the survival of this last of the automat breed in an age dominated by those fast-food emporiums with narrow counters at which one sat on quick-getaway backless stools designed, it seemed, to bedevil the sacroiliac. ''The automat has a special ambiance,'' said Walker. ''This one is more than a half-century old, younger than you or I, to be sure, and it still maintains the Art Deco motif, the sandwiches in the coin-operated glass cages and an atmosphere in which you do not have to move until others indicate that you are not eating and they, as cash customers, would like to have the table. It is also convenient to many estimable upwardly mobile hotel lobbies.'' ''Walker,'' answered Stroller, a New York cynic who knows where the line hits bottom, ''your pretensions are as high as the World Trade Center, but you still have a TKTS-line attitude that you want class at no cost. I've never felt at home in a hotel lobby, I must say. I like atriums and I love the automat. When I was a kid, I used to take the lemon pieces off the iced-tea glasses, mix them with water and enjoy a free lemonade. Until the manager kicked me out.'' ''And I am sure you have been booted out of better places, too,'' said Walker, reprov-ingly. ''There is something about a hotel lobby, a good hotel lobby, that brings with it a sense of dignity, an understanding that the wayfarer is a special person, entitled to the most sensitive treatment during his transit. I wish you had let me take you into the lobby of the United Nations Plaza, opposite that world body's headquarters, in that imposing combination office-cum-hotel-high-rise at 45th Street, just west of First Avenue. It's a modern but discreet lobby divided into sections, with a cosmopolitan custom in attendance. The couches and other seats are comfortable, and I could not hear a word of what I am sure were top-drawer confidences being passed between Very Important People.'' ''Confidences?'' said Stroller. ''I bet they stash lunch in the attache cases. The trouble with hotel lobbies is that they are for the guests of the hotel and maybe for the guests of the guests. I know it's an old New York game, lobby-sitting. You sit and stare at other people as though you belong and they do not belong. If I didn't know that you were genuinely a stuffed shirt, I would be tempted to call you a phony.'' Walker bridled at the critique, but bridling is difficult in a busy automat. ''You know, Stroller, having coffee with you at Horn & Hardart is not like having dinner with Andre,'' he said, with what he considered a well-bred amusement. ''There are lobbies and there are lobbies. I should imagine that the new flamboyant Marriott Marquis, in Times Square at 45th Street, should appeal to you. It is clever and it is clean and bright. The lobby is on the eighth floor and you get to it by way of a central core of elevators. Each car is outlined in bright bulbs, not my thing, of course, but attractive in a brazen way. The lobby has become something of a public square. There are comfortable seats at the eastern end, a cocktail lounge, where you may be asked, but are not forced, to buy a drink. And there is a sort of ledge around the elevator core where everyone, it seems, sits and waits and looks.'' ''Oh, the Marriott is a nice addition,'' agreed Stroller. ''I still prefer, when meeting someone in the theater district, to meet at the Hotel Edison, which runs between 46th and 47th Street, just west of Broadway. It's a respectable old tourist hotel, a bit careworn, perhaps, and I particularly enjoy its 1930's panels. On the 47th Street side, there's a marvelous mirror hanging, on which there is etched an Art Deco scene of the city with the Brooklyn Bridge soaring over it. And you can sit there, listening to the reactions of the tourists to what they have seen in the city.'' Stroller was, for his age, a fellow who really couldn't sit long anywhere, and he suggested that they brave the cold and head for the Citicorp Center. Walker assented, and they buttoned up and headed east to Lexington Avenue, because Walker has a theory that Third Avenue's high-rises, along with those on the Avenue of the Americas, have created two of the fiercest wind tunnels known to man. Indeed, Lexington Avenue was no hothouse on that cold day, and at 45th Street, the two, with no discussion at all, decided to take a breather at the Park Avenue Atrium, which covers the block to 46th Street, between Lexington and Park. The building is 23 granite-faced stories high, but its 7,000-square-foot lobby seems suited to a much larger structure. ''I must say, this is comparable with a good hotel lobby,'' conceded Walker as he gazed up at the lofty overhead into which the elevators, entirely visible, were disappearing with the speed and illumination of fireflies. ''In a nouveau way, I mean. They seem to have a reputable landscape gardener to judge by the foliage and shrubbery. I do think, however, that backless benches, even as handsome as these are, do not encourage long stays. Yet, it is one of the more scenic venues.'' ''It's O.K., a little stiff, maybe, but it's got a Charley O's, not that you go in for that sort of thing,'' said Stroller. Basking in new-found warmth, the two continued up the avenue. Stroller declined a pause at the Hotel Inter-Continental at 48th Street. He was not, in his windbreaker and stained trousers, appropriately accoutered for such an exalted setting. ''Well, I am not sure I would want to be seen with you here, either,'' Walker acquiesced. ''But it is worth a look, and it is still five blocks to Citicorp. It is the only lobby I can think of that recalls, if modestly, those in the imperial hotels of the British Empire before the sun began setting on it.'' ''It's the lobby with the bird cage, I know it,'' said Stroller, as Walker pushed him past the doorman into the reception area. ''It's fine as long as we don't sit down. It's too posh for me.'' ''I don't know that they would discourage you from sitting in the lobby, even though your choice of colors would even clash with the Times Square IRT subway station,'' said Walker, indulgently. ''It is the ultimate in grace, with a half-dozen chandeliers, red leathery couches, comfortable armchairs, wood paneling, a cocktail mezzanine, and, as you coarsely put it, the bird cage. It is not just a common bird cage but a ceiling-high affair of metal wrought in the style of a 19th-century cage and staffed by two colorful birds that twitter.'' They were out almost as quickly as they had gone in, and trudged northward past the Hotel Waldorf-Astoria, that paragon of luxuriant hotel splendor at 50th Street. At 53d Street, they went down the steps into the main floor of Citicorp's Atrium, but not before scanning, as they always did, the architectural ingenuity of the 915-foot-tall building whose main tower is supported by 127-foot columns and is topped by a singular addition to the skyline, a slanted roof designed for solar power. The Atrium was, as ever, alive with humanity, and the pair had difficulty in finding an unoccupied table, which they barely beat a slow-moving tourist trio to on the mezzanine. The floors are lined with stores, mostly food establishments, and linked by several banks of moving stairs. The seating is on serviceable chairs grouped around tables that are not immense but larger than those found in many nightclubs. ''The passing scene is not without interest,'' observed Walker. ''It is an extremely mixed bag, secretaries, even hard hats from neighborhood construction jobs, lots of tourists. I shouldn't be surprised if those fellows in the expensive suits and speaking an incomprehensible tongue were hatching an arms deal.'' ''Arms deals are for hotel lobbies,'' said Stroller. ''They are probably tourists exchanging tips on best buys around town. This place has been in business nearly nine years now, the first of its kind, and it is a hit. They almost always have something performing at lunch time or at 5 P.M., and I can't think of a better place to kill time if you're short on cash. Also, it has clean restrooms, very important if you don't want to spend money in a bar to get the same facilities.'' ''It is odd how each atrium assumes its own character, almost as though it were a hotel lobby,'' mused Walker. ''I walked into the Park Avenue Plaza, at 55 East 52d Street, not to be confused with the Park Avenue Atrium we just visited. It is a big space, certainly, and it has seats in it, and in its corridors they have authors reading from their works from time to time. In December they had live music concerts. There is nothing wrong with it at all, but it does not attract the variety of life that Citicorp does, possibly because it is not on the main traffic route with a subway station in the basement.'' ''True,'' said Stroller. ''But that makes it more intimate and personal, which is what you say you like. I find it somewhat more lively in the Philip Morris building, on 42d and Park, opposite Grand Central Terminal. Grand Central, for sitting, gives you a complete slice of life, top to bottom, by the way, but it is not where you would like to spend much time. Philip Morris has a lobby full of sculpture, nice and bright and warm, with a one-room branch of the Whitney Museum of American Art attached. It has achieved its own popularity, not as kaleidoscopic as this one we're sitting in, but quite cosmopolitan.'' ''Do you feel like continuing our perambulation?'' asked Walker, who was more self-conscious than Stroller was and felt harried by a couple holding trays who were hovering over him. ''We could walk up Madison, past Philip Johnson's telephone building, and go to I.B.M., at 57th Street.'' ''I appreciate Johnson's return to the skyscraper top of our youth,'' said Stroller, ''but I've spent so much time figuring out the cheapest rates to call my son in Perth Amboy that I don't want to look at anything that has to do with telephones. Let's sit a bit. I'm beat. I.B.M. is something else, though, isn't it? It is like a big glass house, an outside feeling, like a real park, completely indoors, with those tall trees and outside-type stone floors. I like the way they have mixed chairs and tables with bench-type seats. And I enjoy going to the I.B.M. Gallery of Science and Art, just downstairs, which right now has an absolutely fantastic show about Tokyo and design in the course of history. One of the best things they've mounted, really, with modern technology, a street decorated with shop signs that you can walk through, an electronic montage of Japanese television commercials and a Buddhist contemplation chamber. Also all for free. As you can see, I've been there recently and I don't feel up to it right now.'' ''Oh, I don't really mind,'' said Walker, as the hovering couple made off to just-vacated chairs. ''Besides, as much as I'm a fan of I.B.M., I don't find the adjoining Trump Tower restful; spectacular, yes, restful, no. Nor is the little strip of Bonwit Teller that connects the two. Once you have admired the reddish stone and the dramatic stairwell of Trump, there is no place to put yourself down without having to answer to a menu. And one mills through throngs going up on the escalators, gapes at store windows, and then mills down again. Quite striking the first time, and the next few times, too, but after that what do you do with it? It is a passageway, not an end unto itself.'' ''Well, I would love to hear you expatiate on the theory of the atrium as inner dead-end street as against the hotel lobby as oasis of true elegance, but I've got to run uptown to meet a friend at Lincoln Center, where there is a free one-act opera at the Performing Arts Library,'' said Stroller. ''It's an odd thing with Lincoln Center. Big place, impressive interiors, great in the good weather but no place except the library to sit around in the bad.'' ''Libraries constitute fine stop offs,'' commented Walker. ''I do appreciate the Donnell, opposite the Museum of Modern Art on 53d Street, or even your ordinary run-of-the-mill library. Not only available seating but something at hand for reading thrown in. The Lincoln Center Library is exceptional because you can actually listen to the music of your choice through headphones, or if that is busy, enjoy the children's section on the mezzanine, with its charming displays, not to mention the exhibitions in the Astor Gallery upstairs.'' ''Yes, but my friend is allergic to literature and so we're meeting at 1 Harkness Plaza, on Broadway between 62d and 63d Streets,'' replied Stroller. It's a big walk-through area, with low-backed red half-moon seats. A bit bare, but a good place to meet and sometimes an arena for itinerant performing groups. My friend's a music lover and will browse through Schirmer's, a store full of scores, until I show up.'' ''You are incorrigibly plebeian, my friend,'' said Walker. ''As for me, I shall work my way westward to 44th Street, just east of Sixth Avenue - in municipal Newspeak, that's Avenue of the Americas - and I shall finish my day with a nightcap at the Algonquin.'' ''You will actually buy a drink?'' asked Stroller, incredulously. ''Don't be silly. I am talking metaphorically,'' Walker answered vigorously. ''My nightcap involves imbibing the aura of New York's most prestigious literary lobby, the lobby whose carpeting nap bent to the tread of the wondrous wits en route to what became known as the Round Table at the Algonquin, a continual seminar conducted by such as Robert Benchley, Dorothy Parker and others famed for the rapierlike riposte.''
