246|1987\01\02|ART: CHINESE WORKS FROM PRIVATE COLLECTIONS|THE China Institute in America is an exhibition space known for ''sleepers.'' In its tiny, scholarly China House Gallery, it has organized solid, low-keyed, informative exhibitions that never make spectacles of themselves and never insist upon broad critical and public attention. Robert Bergman, the director of the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore, captured something of the spirit of the place when he wrote that the ''China House Gallery must be the smallest exhibition space known to man in which shows of true significance are presented.|THE China Institute in America is an exhibition space known for ''sleepers.'' In its tiny, scholarly China House Gallery, it has organized solid, low-keyed, informative exhibitions that never make spectacles of themselves and never insist upon broad critical and public attention. Robert Bergman, the director of the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore, captured something of the spirit of the place when he wrote that the ''China House Gallery must be the smallest exhibition space known to man in which shows of true significance are presented. THE China Institute in America is an exhibition space known for ''sleepers.'' In its tiny, scholarly China House Gallery, it has organized solid, low-keyed, informative exhibitions that never make spectacles of themselves and never insist upon broad critical and public attention. Robert Bergman, the director of the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore, captured something of the spirit of the place when he wrote that the ''China House Gallery must be the smallest exhibition space known to man in which shows of true significance are presented.'' ''Selections of Chinese Art From Private Collections'' is a fitting commemoration of the China House Gallery's 20th anniversary. In 1966 the gallery opened with ''Selections of Chinese Art From Private Collections in the Metropolitan Area.'' The current show contains 41 works from Northeast states. Together the ornaments, pots, plates, sculptures and paintings, spanning more than 4,000 years, demonstrate the strength of the collections of Chinese art in and around New York. They also help define the qualities that have sustained Chinese art for centuries. The degree of sculptural imagination in a culture can be measured more accurately by everyday objects than by grandiose projects for which the most accomplished artists are expected to produce something great. One of the prehistoric pots in the show seems to be swelling or breathing, as if it were a repository or resting place of the wind. One clue to its power is the tension between the handles, which are turned down, and the main body of the pot, which not only expands but also rises. Another is that the three rows of circles painted on the top half of the pot are both held down by the handles and climbing toward the neck and circular mouth. The content suits the form. With a ripeness worthy of a fertility goddess, the pot inspires confidence in its capacity to provide and contain. Few cultures have been more at ease with both geometry and ornamentation. The bronze bell from around the fifth century B.C. is encrusted with hooks and commas and studded with small conical protrusions that resemble breasts in a sculpture by Louise Bourgeois. The patterning both activates the surface and reinforces its cylindrical shape. The result is, in effect, a dialogue between two kinds of time, one immediate and locked into the present, the other continuous and eternal - a dialogue that suits the insistent yet changeless clang of the bell itself. This dialogue is maintained throughout Chinese art, and it is almost always eternity that has the upper hand. The sense that the present belongs to a continuum may be one reason why there is such patience in these works. Part of what attracts Westerners to Chinese art is the impression that no matter how impulsive and gestural, it never seems hurried. In the eighth-century earthenware ''Standing Lady,'' the curve of the drapery, the position of the hands, the rounded, almost puffy face and the strange bun that seems to be gripping the woman's head like an extraterrestrial hand, appear to have emerged almost organically. Throughout early Chinese pottery and sculpture, objects do not seem so much to have been created as to have created themselves. One key to the difference between Chinese and Western art is the approach to line. In Western art the straight line has probably been more important than the curve; at the very least, there has been a heated and often fertile struggle between the two. The straight line is more declarative and linear; that is to say, it tends to imply movement that begins somewhere and ends someplace else. Chinese art has been an art of the curve. With the curved line, there is always movement, but it is movement that invariably turns back upon itself, returning to the same point. While the straight line goes hand-in-hand with progress and change, the curved line is the script of cycles and repetition. Chinese art has an uncanny ability to accommodate within the curve the kind of experience that is not normally identified with it. That a curved line can be light and sensual is not surprising. But the dragons floating about the superb, voluptuous 18th-century plum vases are also menacing. And in the marble eighth-century lion, clawing and crunching its feline victim, the kind of curve that is so refined and courtly in the ''Standing Lady'' is a mark of ferocity. The West may identify the curved line primarily with softness and gentleness, but in China it has been able to accommodate cruelty, immobility and just about everything else. The China Institute in America is at 125 East 65th Street. The exhibition, selected by the scholars James C. Y. Watt and Annette L. Juliano, closes Sunday. Also of interest this week: Mother and Child in African Sculpture (African-American Institute, First Avenue and 47th Street): ''Mother and Child in African Sculpture'' contains around 50 works, some tiny, almost all of them from the 19th and 20th centuries. The importance of the theme is clear from the ceremonial function of many of the objects: staffs, headdresses, divination rattles, drums and grave-posts. The strength of the show is its ability to dramatize rituals, conventions and differences that may be lost behind a sculptural facade that can still seem far more uniform than it actually is. The show, financed by the Coca-Cola Foundation, is accompanied by a brochure with a helpful essay by Herbert M. Cole. Most maternity images, he writes, were ''destined for shrines administered by ritual specialists.'' He reveals that there is still limited information on many of the ''poses and positions'' in these works, and that in some African cultures the mother and child theme hardly appears at all. Mr. Cole raises the question of the ''dualistic opposition between nature and culture'' that is ''so characteristic of African thought.'' While discussing the complex role of women in African societies, he also offers an intriguing piece of documentation: ''Informal surveys of African sculpture,'' he writes, ''reveal in fact that female figures substantially outnumber those of males.'' There are powerful images in the show. In one ''Seated Mother With Child'' from the Ivory Coast, the child rests on the mother's knee, then reaches for its mother's breast, stretching its body to such a degree that it seems elastic. In a rare and puzzling sculpture of a ''Birth Scene,'' from Cameroon, men hold the arms and feet of a suspended woman - almost like figures holding Christ in Raphael's ''Entombment'' - participating in, perhaps even partaking of, the process of birth. Most of the women in this show are frontal and impersonal. While a child may occasionally show expression, or climb and crawl over its mother's body as if she were the earth, the mother tends to be expressionless and cool. Sometimes her expression may be fierce, and the breasts that nourish her child may look like missiles or phalluses, which leaves no doubt about her protective and ritual power. Within the relative sameness of the imagery, there are many important distinctions. Some mothers sit, some walk, some kneel as if about to make of their child an offering. The children's two main positions are either lying like a board across the mother's lap or being carried on the mother's back, sometimes surveying the scenery, sometimes staring smack into the mother's spine. But the child may also be nestled into the crook of the mother's elbow; or a mother with twins may hold a child on each knee like ventriloquist's dummies. The analogies and metaphors suggested by the images are invariably pertinent. While the child is generally passive as it is held and suckled, the mother can squeeze her breast as if it were an udder, and the child can lock both hands around the breast as if it were a bottle. In ''Mother and Child Seated on a Stool,'' from the Ivory Coast, the child seems to be not only drinking from the breast but also triumphantly playing it like a trumpet. Hair styles may be wildly different, depending upon the region, and in the ''Mother and Child Seated on a Chair,'' from Ghana, the mother's hair looks like ram's horns. Within her strictly defined changeable role, the African woman that emerges in this show has almost awesome power. The diversity within the apparent sameness is clear from the treatment of the main material, wood. It can look like terra cotta or lava. In the remarkable grave-posts from Madagascar, it suggests limestone or sand. The ''Mother and Child Seated on a Stool'' looks like shiny black marble. The accompanying slide show is a reminder that these wood objects, in their natural setting, would seem part of the natural order. In the ''Kneeling Mother With Child on Back and Carrying a Bowl, Arugba,'' from Nigeria, the way mother and child appear to be perched on a cross-section of a tree makes it seem as if the image has been inside the tree all along. The artist clearly wants us to believe that this representation of a natural process was born of a natural process itself. (Through Feb. 28.)
