247|1987\01\02|CULTURAL COLLISIONS ON 'ROUTE 1 AND 9'|IN ''Route 1 and 9,'' the dramatic collage by the experimental theater collective the Wooster Group, blindfolded actors in blackface put up a tin house.|IN ''Route 1 and 9,'' the dramatic collage by the experimental theater collective the Wooster Group, blindfolded actors in blackface put up a tin house. IN ''Route 1 and 9,'' the dramatic collage by the experimental theater collective the Wooster Group, blindfolded actors in blackface put up a tin house. Once the house is constructed, the gathering turns into a raucous party in which the cast re-enacts a scatological routine by the veteran comic Pigmeat Markham. As the party progresses, a very different sort of drama unfolds on video monitors. Ron Vawter, impersonating the author Clifton Fadiman, delivers a stuffy exegesis on the symbolism of Thornton Wilder's play ''Our Town,'' scenes from which are portrayed soap-opera style, with the actors weeping glycerin tears. The piece culminates with two home movies, one of which portrays a journey away from New York City on the dilapidated New Jersey thoroughfare that gives the piece its title, the other an erotic film of indecipherable couplings. ''Route 1 and 9,'' which the Wooster Group created in 1981 and is being revived at the Kitchen (512 West 19th Street) through Jan. 18, is the first part of ''The Road to Immortality,'' a retrospective trilogy by the seven-member collective that will continue into the spring at the Performing Garage, the ensemble's regular performing space in SoHo. The second part of the trilogy, ''Just the High Points,'' featuring the group's dark, semi-documentary exploration of the 60's drug culture, paranoia and social persecution, will run from Jan. 22 to Feb. 1. It will be followed in March by the premiere of ''Part Three,'' a collaboration between Elizabeth LeCompte, the Wooster Group's artistic director, and the experimental director Peter Sellars. The new work, initiated by Mr. Sellars, is based on Flaubert's ''Temptation of St. Anthony.'' The Wooster Group's retrospective comes at a moment when several in the company have begun gaining recognition outside the collective. Two of the group's longtime members, Spalding Gray and Willem Dafoe, have become national stars. Earlier this season, Mr. Gray performed his autobiographical monologues uptown at Lincoln Center, and he has also appeared in the movies ''The Killing Fields'' and ''True Stories.'' Mr. Dafoe has lent his Mephistophelean magnetism to several movies, most notably ''Streets of Fire,'' ''To Live and Die in L.A.'' and ''Platoon.'' And Mr. Vawter has become an increasingly sought-after television actor. With an artistic point of view that unflinchingly contemplates psychic disintegration, chaos and violence, the Wooster Group represents the darker vision of New York's theatrical avant-garde. Unlike Robert Wilson and Martha Clarke, who explore relativity, irrationality and evil in the context of beautiful eye-pleasing tableaux, the Wooster Group's theatrical collages present the violent inexplicable collision of cultures and artistic materials without prettification or overt moralizing, although the work resonates with a post-countercultural despair. Because of its use of blackface and old-time black vaudeville, ''Route 1 and 9,'' has itself been accused unfairly of racism. Performed with a frenzied, shocking energy, the work is an extreme juxtaposition of ideas of color, culture, community and ways of looking at death. Ways to Tell a Story ''When I put together a piece, I take ideas either randomly or intuitively and don't impose a thematic structure,'' Ms. LeCompte said recently. ''I've also always been interested in finding ways of telling a story theatrically that are unrelated to Stanislavsky-based acting. Having studied American comedy for years, I came across Pigmeat Markham in the late 70's and started collecting his records. Using only the records, we tried to re-create the routines as closely as possible. I was interested in the way he improvised his routines on the spot. Out of that idea came the notion of the ensemble constructing the piece at the same time that they performed it. ''During the same period that we were working on the Pigmeat Markham routines,'' Ms. LeCompte continued, ''we were doing readings from 'Our Town.' While working on the play, we got involved with teaching films from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which we reproduced exactly. Initially I had no thought of putting Pigmeat Markham together with 'Our Town,' but they gradually came together in open rehearsals over many months. Slowly, the images and symbols began to reverberate.'' Ms. LeCompte likened her technique to that of the collage sculptures made of rubbish created by the German Surrealist artist Kurt Schwitters. ''He envisioned a total work of art, which would embrace all the arts in a single unit, but rather than a Wagnerian fusion, it was Dadaist,'' she said. ''Most of it remained in the realm of theory.'' Some of the ingredients assembled in ''Route 1 and 9'' include music by Charles Ives, Shaker processional dances, and rhythm and blues. The Wooster Group was founded by Ms. LeCompte and Mr. Gray in 1975 together with several members of Richard Schechner's Performance Group and in the last 11 years has produced eight major pieces. Out of experiments with structured improvisation, the group evolved its first piece, ''Sakonnet Point,'' an evocation of childhood that became the first part of the trilogy ''Three Pieces in Rhode Island.'' Many of the Wooster Group's pieces interact with well-known American plays. ''Nayatt School'' used a scene from T. S. Eliot's ''Cocktail Party,'' and ''Point Judith,'' the epilogue to the trilogy, quoted from Eugene O'Neill's ''Long Day's Journey Into Night.'' Arthur Miller Objects The Wooster Group ran into trouble two years ago when the playwright Arthur Miller halted performances of ''LSD,'' for unauthorized usage of excerpts from ''The Crucible.'' ''LSD,'' now known as ''Just the High Points,'' is the second part of the current retrospective. Since the brouhaha, Mr. Miller's text has been replaced by an original play, ''The Hearing,'' written by Michael Kirby, and a gibberish language. In constructing one scene in the piece, according to Ms. LeCompte, the performers took a collective LSD trip, videotaped the experience, watched it and reproduced as closely as possible every detail. That kind of uncompromising rigor courts danger, and the Wooster Group has encountered more than its share of hostility and misunderstanding - from critics, authors, and the New York State Council on the Arts, which denied financing for ''Route 1 and 9'' after the charge of racism was raised. ''We've been critically treated very well in Washington, D.C., in Boston and all over Europe,'' Ms. LeCompte reflected. ''It's funny to come home where we've been treated more equivocally. But I think we thrive on it in some way. I think it's important to do it in this atmosphere.'' Performances of ''Route 1 and 9'' are Thursday through Sunday at 8 P.M. at the Kitchen. Shows are at 8 P.M. and tickets are $15. Reservations: 255-5793.
