249|1987\01\02|BOOKS OF THE TIMES|A DICTIONARY OF CATCH PHRASES:|A DICTIONARY OF CATCH PHRASES: A DICTIONARY OF CATCH PHRASES: American and British, From the Sixteenth Century to the Present Day. By Eric Partridge. Revised and updated; edited by Paul Beale. 384 pages. Stein and Day. $24.95. WHAT exactly is a catch phrase? In his introduction to the first edition of A Dictionary of Catch Phrases, Eric Partridge wisely refused to let himself be drawn into attempting a hard and fast definition. The most he would settle for was ''a saying that has caught on, and pleases the public,'' which is vague enough - as he intended - to overlap with the cliche, the proverb and the familiar quotation. He also pointed out that many catch phrases ''are not, in the grammarians' sense, phrases at all, but sentences.'' In practice, however, most of us can recognize a catch phrase when we meet one, and the best way to indicate the field that Mr. Partridge set out to cover in the dictionary is to quote a few examples. ''A hard act to follow'' gets an entry. So does ''just what the doctor ordered.'' So do ''all systems go,'' ''famous last words,'' ''we're just good friends.'' So do ''think nothing of it!,'' ''it takes two to tango,'' ''my feet are killing me,'' ''my lips are sealed.'' Some catch phrases come and go -''now you see them, now you don't'' -but the ones that last are woven deep into the language. Even when they look like cliches, as they frequently do, there is an essential difference: the cliche is a hackneyed idiom that hopes that it can still palm itself off as a fresh response, the catch phrase positively rejoices in being a formula, an accepted gambit, a ready-made reaction. Most catch phrases are meant to provide a comic gloss on the situations they describe; a high proportion of them parody or subvert established slogans and sentiments. At the same time, they constitute an invaluable storehouse of unofficial social history. A Dictionary of Catch Phrases complements without seriously duplicating Mr. Partridge's great Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English. It was originally published in 1977; Mr. Partridge was planning a new, enlarged edition when his health failed, and shortly before his death in 1979 he handed over his notes to Paul Beale, who was already at work revising the Dictionary of Slang. The second edition of A Dictionary of Catch Phrases is half as long again as the first. Mr. Beale has revised around a third of the original entries, incorporated some 1,500 new ones based on Mr. Partridge's notes, and added a number of his own. He has also provided an index of key words - an undoubted advantage in a book in which many of the catch phrases are listed under nondescript introductory prepositions and pronouns. Where previously, for example, ''you some kind of a nut?'' only appeared under ''you,'' you can now look it up under ''nut'' as well. Like all good dictionary makers, Mr. Partridge saw his first job as defining and explaining, and so does Mr. Beale. One of the more piquant pleasures that the dictionary offers, in fact, is the formal elucidation of phrases that are generally uttered with fine abandon - ''attaboy!,'' for instance (''exclamatory approbation''), or a lilting Australian contribution, ''and did he marry poor blind Nell?'' (''a rhetorical question asked about anything improbable''). Another outstanding feature is the skill with which the editors and the fellow enthusiasts who have assisted them succeed in conveying the precise tone of a catch phrase, and pinpointing the social context in which it applies. Or sometimes the social contexts, in the plural. I like the term invented by one of the correspondents, Cyril Whelan - ''a pen-knife phrase,'' meaning one that ''can be put to a variety of different uses - often apparently contradictory.'' Mr. Whelan was referring to the highly adaptable ''good night, Vienna'' (taken from the title of a romantic operetta), but there are lots of other penknives in Partridge and Beale's collection. It would be useless to deny - and Mr. Beale is the first to admit - that the dictionary is markedly stronger on the British side than the American. Many of the more ephemeral British entries are unlikely to be of much interest to American readers, while the coverage of American catch phrases is distinctly patchy. There is an entry for ''that will do nicely, sir!,'' (from an oft-repeated British television commercial, neatly summed up by Mr. Beale as displaying ''the grovelling acquiescence of an hotelier to the supposed power and status-symbolism of an American Express credit card''), but there is no mention of ''don't leave home without it.'' This is not to say, however, that American catch phrases aren't present in force, from ''they went thataway'' to ''the fickle finger of fate,'' or that the entries for them don't contain a great deal of diverting material. Here as elsewhere, one of the great strengths of the dictionary is the variety of sidelights it supplies, and the range of its supporting quotations. It is another sign of Mr. Partridge's largess that he should be willing to cite precedents in terms of ideas (or ploys) as well as actual phrasing. ''There is a very pretty Collection of Prints in the next Room, Madam, will you give me leave to explain them to you?'' - who else would have taken the trouble to track down a remote ancestor of ''come up and see my etchings'' in a comedy published in 1710? And if he sometimes followed his fancy, and threw in information that wasn't strictly relevant, I am glad to report that Mr. Beale maintains the tradition. It is surely an excellent thing, for example, even if it carries us some distance from catch phrases, to be reminded of the advice to travelers in one of Saki's short stories: ''Never be flippantly rude to elderly strangers in foreign hotels. They always turn out to be the King of Sweden.''
