250|1987\01\02|AT THE MOVIES|OLIVER STONE, the writer and director of ''Platoon,'' the critically acclaimed film about the day-to-day life and fears of an infantry platoon during the Vietnam War, was a soldier in Vietnam from 1967 to 1968. When he assembled his 30-man cast - most of the actors too young to have fought in the war - he had to find a way to help them understand something about the world they were portraying.|OLIVER STONE, the writer and director of ''Platoon,'' the critically acclaimed film about the day-to-day life and fears of an infantry platoon during the Vietnam War, was a soldier in Vietnam from 1967 to 1968. When he assembled his 30-man cast - most of the actors too young to have fought in the war - he had to find a way to help them understand something about the world they were portraying. OLIVER STONE, the writer and director of ''Platoon,'' the critically acclaimed film about the day-to-day life and fears of an infantry platoon during the Vietnam War, was a soldier in Vietnam from 1967 to 1968. When he assembled his 30-man cast - most of the actors too young to have fought in the war - he had to find a way to help them understand something about the world they were portraying. He hired a retired Marine captain, Dale Dye, and three Marine reservists, who put the actors through two weeks of rigorous field training on location in the Philippines. The training was difficult and physically demanding, and although it was closer to playing war in summer camp than actually fighting for survival, it did engender some of the exhaustion, strain and comradeship of battle conditions, making a more cohesive and convincing cast. ''We all had to deal with the task at hand,'' said Willem Dafoe, who plays Sergeant Elias, the officer who is the soul of the unit. ''It was fairly grueling. It's not easy shooting in those conditions in the Philippines. There were no usual Hollywood perks, no honey wagons'' - dressing-room trailers - ''for the actors to relax in, no good food. We sat in foxholes and ate rations and never slept more than two hours at a time. So a real camaraderie developed. The training really helped - though it sounds kind of self-important and self-satisfied to talk about it too much. But it did set the tone of this being important. Oliver had a story to tell and the training was a kind of initiation that made us somehow worthy to tell his story. ''I'm not saying we really suffered, and I'm not saying we know war, but we did something difficult that helped us get into it,'' Mr. Dafoe said. ''It became very important to all of us to get the respect of Captain Dye and to respect what he had done, regardless of how we felt politically about the war.'' The New Vision Of Carlos Saura The career of the Spanish director Carlos Saura, whose film ''El Amor Brujo'' is playing at the Cinema Studio 1, illustrates a paradox in the relationship between art and political freedom. Mr. Saura, a democrat with strong anti-Fascist convictions, remained in his native Spain throughout the Franco period, managing to produce a body of work that expressed his personal vision as well as, implicitly, his opposition to Franco's politics. Although his country was ruled by a dictator and his films had to pass a censor, Mr. Saura often concerned himself with forbidden themes. One of his most political and controversial films, ''La Prima Angelica,'' managed to pass the censors but aroused a great deal of controversy in its frank examination of Nationalist forces and values during the Spanish Civil War, especially their oppressive influence on one Spanish family. Another film, ''Anna and the Wolves,'' was banned in Spain in the early 1970's. Franco has been dead for more than 11 years now, and Spain is governed by a freely elected Socialist Government. The kind of censorship imposed during the Franco era is a thing of the past. Yet Mr. Saura's last three films - all featuring the dancing skills of Spain's foremost flamenco star and choreographer, Antonio Gades - are movies he could easily have made during Franco's regime. ''Blood Wedding,'' the first collaboration between Mr. Gades and Mr. Saura, was a commercial success. ''Carmen'' was one of the highest-grossing Spanish movies ever made and was nominated for an Academy Award, and the latest, ''El Amor Brujo'' (''Love, the Magician''), made at a cost of about $2 million, is one of the most expensive films in Spanish history. Why has Mr. Saura turned away from social and political themes now that he has the freedom to say whatever he wants? ''In my case,'' said Mr. Saura, ''it's a moral or ethical question. With Franco, I needed to attack a system which I found hateful, within the limits of possibilities under censorship. When Franco died, Spain changed. There is complete freedom, so I am free, too. I feel freer to do things that are more personal.'' Mr. Saura pointed out that his films had never been political in the sense of promoting a manifesto or party. ''The only politics were that they were anti-Franco,'' he said. Life on the Fringe, In Pakula's 'Orphans' Although the play ''Orphans'' is set in Philadelphia, Alan J. Pakula moved the story's locale to New Jersey for his film version, and used several shots of New York City. ''There are certain New York locations that are just fabulous,'' Mr. Pakula said. ''For example, the first shot is at the new Convention Center - a highly unlikely opening for this picture, but it provides a total contrast to where and how these boys live. The story didn't mandate Philadelphia, it could take place in any major city.'' Mr. Pakula wrapped up the shooting of ''Orphans'' a few months ago. The film, starring Albert Finney and based on Lyle Kessler's play, is tentatively scheduled to open in early fall. It is about two brothers, living together on the margins of society, who have evolved a strangely symbiotic relationship. Treat, the elder (Matthew Modine), obtains money by mugging and picking pockets, and looks after the younger, sickly Phillip (Kevin Anderson). Mr. Finney, re-creating his London stage role, plays Harold, the Chicago businessman whom Treat attempts to hold for ransom and who turns the tables, transforming their shabby lives. ''The story is really about two young people living on the outskirts of society,'' Mr. Pakula said. ''In New York there is always the sense of wealth and power - the feeling is even in the buildings. Even when you're not directly using that idea, it's there in the background. This story had the quality of a legend. While it's real, it's a heightened reality, and you have to try to use sharpened visual contrasts. For me, no place gives that like New York. The contrast is extreme. It should be like going from the Emerald City to where the boys live on the outskirts of civilization.'' For Disney Films, Time Means Profits ''Lady and the Tramp,'' Disney's classic animated feature about the blossoming of true love between a pampered cocker spaniel and a good-hearted mutt with street-smarts, was back to warm the hearts of a new generation of children this Christmas. The film, which Disney distributors estimated would gross about $36 million to $37 million this time, has made over $13 million so far. Disney films, like good wine, have a way of increasing in value with time. When the film first opened in 1955, it grossed about $9 million, according to Richard Cook, senior vice president for domestic distribution at Disney. When it was brought out again in 1962, it took a slight dip, grossing between $6 million and $7 million. But in 1971, the film made $10 million, and when it was re-released in 1980, it grossed $27 million. ''Even allowing for inflation,'' Mr. Cook said, ''the increase is appreciable.'' The pattern seems to hold true for most Disney animated films. Their commercial value is not measured in the first-run grosses, but in their increasing profit margin over the years. ''One Hundred and One Dalmatians'' first opened in March 1961, grossing $14 million. It has had three releases since then, each one better than the last. In 1969, it earned its company $15 million; in 1979, $19 million, and in 1985 it brought in a whopping $32 million. Considering that the Disney classics require no huge expenses to keep them going, the films certainly seem to be paying their own way. One of the most dramatic cases is ''Pinocchio,'' Mr. Cook said. ''It was first released in 1940, when it grossed about $4 million to $5 million. Of course admission then was probably about 25 cents. In 1978, it grossed $15 million and in 1984, $26 million. It was out in video but after Christmas we stopped it. As we release new movies for video, we will call back others. We'll continue to re-evaluate things to see what is better for us to do commercially.'' Disney releases about three animated features a year. At Easter it will bring back ''The Aristocats,'' and next Christmas - along with a new animated version of ''Oliver Twist'' - ''Cinderella'' will once again go to the ball and marry the handsome prince.
