251|1987\01\02|POP AND JAZZ GUIDE|Marti Stevens and Margaret Whiting, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street (758-2272). Michael's Pub's ''All Hart'' series of concerts paying tribute to the lyric genius of Lorenz Hart closes this weekend with guest appearances tonight by Marti Stevens and tomorrow by Margaret Whiting. Each will be joined by the jazz singer Mark Murphy and the series host, Jonathan Schwartz.|Marti Stevens and Margaret Whiting, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street (758-2272). Michael's Pub's ''All Hart'' series of concerts paying tribute to the lyric genius of Lorenz Hart closes this weekend with guest appearances tonight by Marti Stevens and tomorrow by Margaret Whiting. Each will be joined by the jazz singer Mark Murphy and the series host, Jonathan Schwartz. Marti Stevens and Margaret Whiting, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street (758-2272). Michael's Pub's ''All Hart'' series of concerts paying tribute to the lyric genius of Lorenz Hart closes this weekend with guest appearances tonight by Marti Stevens and tomorrow by Margaret Whiting. Each will be joined by the jazz singer Mark Murphy and the series host, Jonathan Schwartz. Ms. Stevens, a husky-voiced 50's supper-club singer who went on to star in ''High Spirits'' and ''Company'' in London, is appearing for the first time in years on a New York cabaret stage tonight. The following evening, Ms. Whiting, an indefatigably forthright and warm vocalist, will apply her big, burnished voice to a medley from ''Pal Joey.'' Shows both nights are at 9 and 11, and there is a $10 cover charge and a two-drink minimum per person. John Hammond Jr., the Speak Easy, 107 Macdougal Street (598-9670). The country-blues singer-guitarist interprets classic blues songs by Robert Johnson, Elmore James and others with a scrupulous reverence and knowledge of the past. If John Hammond Jr. totally subsumes his own musical personality to the material, he is also never less than respectful of the tradition. Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11 and tickets are $6. Flo and Eddie, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street (228-6300). Mark Volman and Howard Kaylan, who call themselves Flo and Eddie as a duo, were founding members of the 60's pop group the Turtles, and are rock-and-roll humorists in the manner of Frank Zappa. Although their musical pranks don't go to the scabrous extremes that Mr. Zappa's do, their parodies and deflations of rock-and-roll icons have enough bite and precision to elicit smiles of satisfaction. By spicing their irreverent observations with straight versions of old Turtles hits, these shrewd pop veterans maintain an off-kilter sense of fun. Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 and seats are $12.
