253|1987\01\02|WEEKENDER GUIDE|Friday MORE IN PREVIEWS It was 25 years ago that ''A Man for All Seasons'' first opened on Broadway, and its story about Sir Thomas More continues to be performed around the world. Philip Bosco, the longtime New York actor, is starring as More in a production directed by Paul Giovanni at the Roundabout Theater, at 100 East 17th Street.|Friday MORE IN PREVIEWS It was 25 years ago that ''A Man for All Seasons'' first opened on Broadway, and its story about Sir Thomas More continues to be performed around the world. Philip Bosco, the longtime New York actor, is starring as More in a production directed by Paul Giovanni at the Roundabout Theater, at 100 East 17th Street. Friday MORE IN PREVIEWS It was 25 years ago that ''A Man for All Seasons'' first opened on Broadway, and its story about Sir Thomas More continues to be performed around the world. Philip Bosco, the longtime New York actor, is starring as More in a production directed by Paul Giovanni at the Roundabout Theater, at 100 East 17th Street. The drama, by Robert Bolt, also features Charles Keating, Maria Tucci, Diane Venora, Robert Stattel, J. Kenneth Campbell, George Guidall and Campbell Scott. The set designer is Daniel Ettinger and the lighting designer is Dawn Chiang. This is Mr. Bosco's 10th appearance in a Roundabout Theater production. Performances tonight and tomorrow night are at 8, with a matinee at 2 P.M. tomorrow. Sunday is the production's official opening, with the performance starting at 2. Tickets are $18 to $27. The number for reservations is 420-1883. AFTER-CHRISTMAS DRAMAS Medieval music. Candlelight. The Neo-Byzantine sanctuary of Christ Church United Methodist is the dramatic setting this weekend of two medieval music dramas that are to be performed by the Mannes Camerata. The plays, which were traditionally presented in the weeks after Christmas, are entitled ''Herod'' and ''Slaughter of the Innocents.'' Both are directed by Paul C. Echols, director of the Mannes Camerata, which is made up of faculty and students of the Mannes College of Music. Featured instruments include the lute, hammered dulcimer, wire harp, shawm, recorder, flute and psaltery. Performances are at 8 tonight, tomorrow and Sunday at the church, at 60th Street and Park Avenue. Tickets are $15 ($10 for students and the GOG JUMP elderly). The number for information is 595-1747. Saturday ANDEAN INSTRUMENTS Ever hear an antara? How about a siku or a tiple? Any other weekend, one might have to head to Bolivia or Ecuador to hear these musical instruments. But Saturday the curious should head to Merkin Concert Hall for a concert entitled ''Music and Dance of the Andes.'' A group called Inkhay, under the direction of Pepe Santana, will present traditional Andean tunes on 26 instruments. The performance is at 8 P.M. at the concert hall, 129 West 67th Street. Tickets are $15 and $12. Information 206-1050 ROAD TO BETHLEHEM The Christmas traditions of 17th-century Naples will come alive Saturday and Sunday at St. Mark's Church, at 131 Second Avenue, near 10th Street. The New York University-based music group known as I Giullari di Piazza will perform ''La Cantata dei Pastori,'' which means ''The Shepherd's Tale.'' With dance, puppets, masks and a jester who narrates the story in English between acts, the performance speaks of the forces of good and evil during events just preceding the birth of Jesus. The performance Saturday is at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 5 P.M. Tickets are $10 ($6 for children and the elderly). Information: 431-7179. CLASSICS ON FILM If it's been a long time since you've read ''Wuthering Heights,'' ''Lord Jim'' or ''Ivanhoe,'' a film program at the Hudson Park branch of the New York Public Library may refresh your memories of those classics. Starting this Saturday and for the next four Saturdays, the Hudson Park branch, at 66 LeRoy Street, is showing films of great books. Today's film is ''Wuthering Heights'' starring Laurence Olivier and Merle Oberon. On Jan. 10, ''Lord Jim'' will be screened and on Jan. 17 ''Ivanhoe.'' Other movies scheduled are ''Great Expectations'' and ''Little Women.'' All films will be shown at 2 P.M. Admission is free. Information: 243-6876. Sunday HISTORIC BARK Longer than a football field and with 32 sails, the four-masted bark Peking was considered a highly advanced cargo ship in 1911 and plowed the waters between Europe and the west coast of South America with a remarkably small crew: 8 officers and 24 sailors. The historic bark is now peacefully docked at Pier 16 at the South Street Seaport Museum, where a new exhibition is on display entitled ''Peking: The Men Who Sailed Her.'' Visitors can examine the deckhouse, which originally housed the vessel's crew, as well as more than 200 photographs that feature many facets of the men's life at sea. The exhibition, which is a permanent addition to the Seaport Museum, is open 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. on weekends. Admission is $4 for adults ($3 for the elderly and $2 for children). The museum is at 207 Front Street. Information: 669-9424. SONGS AT CARNEGIE Songs by Richard Strauss can be heard at Carnegie Hall this Sunday. Susan Dunn, the soprano, will be the soloist for his ''Four Last Songs'' with the American Symphony Orchestra under the direction of John Mauceri. Ms. Dunn has appeared at the Washington Opera, La Scala and the Opera of Bologna. The concert will also include the Overture from ''La Forza del Destino'' by Verdi and Respighi's ''Pines of Rome.'' The performance is at 3 P.M. Tickets: $6 to $19.50. Information: 247-7800. DANCE COLLAGE With music by Ravel and popular French songs of the 1920's, Joelle Ballonzoli will create an unusual dance collage about her relationship with her 12-year-old daughter on Sunday at Long Island University's Triangle Theater. Entitled ''Friends of the Gretsch Building Newsletter'' and featuring Ms. Ballonzoli and her daughter, Ersellia Feron, the work tries to document the seven years the two spent together in a loft. The piece includes multilingual conversations and narration in English, French, Spanish and Yiddish. The performance is at 2 P.M. at Long Island University's Brooklyn Campus, on the Flatbush Avenue Extension at DeKalb Avenue. Tickets are $5. The work will also be presented at the Triangle Theater on Jan. 11 and 18. Reservations: 693-2740.
