255|1987\01\02|HIPPIE FOES OF THE DRAFT HANDLED WITH KID GLOVES|As they waited outside a local court where their confederates were on trial for taking part in an illegal demonstration, the members and supporters of Freedom and Peace, Poland's draft resistance movement, presented a picture of protest that stylistically, at least, seemed closer to 1960's American hippies and yippies than to the banned Solidarity movement.|As they waited outside a local court where their confederates were on trial for taking part in an illegal demonstration, the members and supporters of Freedom and Peace, Poland's draft resistance movement, presented a picture of protest that stylistically, at least, seemed closer to 1960's American hippies and yippies than to the banned Solidarity movement. As they waited outside a local court where their confederates were on trial for taking part in an illegal demonstration, the members and supporters of Freedom and Peace, Poland's draft resistance movement, presented a picture of protest that stylistically, at least, seemed closer to 1960's American hippies and yippies than to the banned Solidarity movement. The young men, all in their 20's, included some with long hair and some with single earrings. One wore one red sneaker and one blue one, and another was dressed in tails, a rhinestone on his satin lapel. With them were women who hugged them and joked openly about police efforts to keep them from the courtroom, where 22 detained members of the organization were being charged with staging a sidewalk protest urging the release from prison of two members who refused military service. The men were released a few days after the protest. Angry stares of young police officers at the courthouse seemed like flashbacks to construction workers in New York heaping abuse upon antiwar protesters of the Vietnam era. 'A Personal Thing' ''Yes, I felt the police hatred was a personal thing,'' said Jacek Czaputowicz a short time after the court aquitted half the demonstrators and fined the rest. An economist, 32 years old and unemployed, he is one of the leaders of Freedom and Peace group. ''It was not just professional disdain,'' he said. ''It is personal, passionate hatred. I think it is because we are spontaneous and that, among other things, we are ridiculing the military myth so powerful in this country while they are so neat.'' ''But, there was also something else,'' he went on. ''It was clear that the police were under orders from the top to handle us like eggs - no hitting, no rough stuff - and that must have infuriated them.'' In November, 51 supporters of the group, including 2 West German antiwar activists, were detained for several hours by the police near the town of Tarnow as they prepared to place a wreath on the grave of Otton Szimek, a German soldier executed by the Nazis for refusing to kill civilians. ''We were kept from the grave,'' said one of the group. ''But here, too, the police officials who questioned us acted as if they had gloves on.'' 'Respected Our Views' ''They said they respected our views and our goals but that they were only concerned that our wreathlaying ceremony might be exploited by those German revanchists who yearn for the formerly German parts of Poland.'' Why exactly should this still small group of antiwar. political oppositionists and ecologically concerned young people be accorded deferential treatment is a source of wonder and debate within the wider opposition where Freedom and Peace has allies and supporters. After all, some of the older opposition had told the young Freedom and Peace people they seemed particularly vulnerable. Though small in membership the group is the most cohesive organization to have arisen since Solidarity, reflecting ideas and tactics of a generation swept up by hopes unleashed in Solidarity's bloom while its members were still in school. It was mostly made up of students lacking the protective validity of prominent workers such as Solidarity still enjoys. Moreover, by stressing draft resistance, the group's members were aware that they might arouse disapproval among pious Catholics and Government critics who still widely regard military service as a patriotic obligation. Remarkable Victories And yet, despite the warnings from their older mentors, the group has not only thrived and expanded, but has won remarkable victories. ''With our hunger strikes, demonstrations and petitions, we have won the release of people from prison who refused to take the oath of military service and more recently we pressured the Government to extend the amnesty for political prisoners to embrace people who went to prison rather than report for army service,'' Mr. Czaputowicz said. The group is eclectic in its goals and amorphous in its membership, including conscientious objectors, pacifists and even some quite militant anti-Communists. A minority is concerned with ecological issues, pushing for plans to have draft resisters allowed to clean up the environment. Links With Western Groups Pamphlets and leaflets are prepared secretly and members have established links with antiwar groups in Western countries while developing less close contacts with men and women interested in independent social action in the Eastern bloc. Perhaps the group's most extensive campaign was its support of those young men who were prepared to go to the army but not to swear, as all new soldiers must, that they will uphold the interests of Poland's military allies, which is understood as an act of fealty to the Soviet Union. Freedom and Peace has suggested that some army units be set up for those unwilling to swear what it views as subservience to a foreign power. The group has never received any direct response from the Government, but Mr. Czaputowicz maintains there is a continuing process of ''negotiations through protest and fact.'' Another demand put forward by Freedom and Peace has called for a system of institutionalized alternate service for those whose world views will not allow them take arms. At present, Poland does permit some young men to work off their army time in community service, but Mr. Czaputowicz said the decision in these cases is made entirely by military authorities and it never includes those in the top health category. Right of Alternate Service He said Freedom and Peace wanted all young men to have the right to perform alternate service outside of the military if they wanted to, by working in hospitals or on squads repairing ecological damage. Mr. Czaputowicz, a former leader of the independent university student movement of 1980, said Freedom and Peace had about 100 full-time, fully involved campaigners but that there were about 10,000 variously involved supporters associated with chapters in all large Polish cities. Among its members are people with well-known names and well known genealogies. For example, one of the leaders of Freedom and Peace in Cracow is Konstanty Miodowicz, a lecturer at Jagelonian University, whose father, Alfred Miodowicz, is the head of the labor unions set up by the Government to replace the outlawed Solidarity unions. The elder Mr. Miodowicz is also a member of the Communist Party Politburo. Also, Jan Jozef Lipski, an internationally respected historian and opposition patriarch, has lent his name and stature to the Freedom and Peace group. The presence of such people in the ranks is at times offered as explanation for a degree of official tolerance. But Mr. Czaputowicz thinks that what has so far provided his group with the greatest protection has been the support it has gained from those Western, mostly West European, antiwar groups, which have been singled out by Moscow as important factors in Soviet disarmament and European strategies. WARSAW JOURNAL
