257|1987\01\02|LEADERS AREN'T NAMED|A six-day session of Vietnam's National Assembly ended in Hanoi on Monday without the naming of new Government leaders. No explanation was given by the official Vietnamese news organizations for the absence of expected Cabinet changes.|A six-day session of Vietnam's National Assembly ended in Hanoi on Monday without the naming of new Government leaders. No explanation was given by the official Vietnamese news organizations for the absence of expected Cabinet changes. A six-day session of Vietnam's National Assembly ended in Hanoi on Monday without the naming of new Government leaders. No explanation was given by the official Vietnamese news organizations for the absence of expected Cabinet changes. A Vietnamese News Agency account of the session said only that the assembly had approved a draft law on marriage and the family, adopted development and budget plans for 1987 - including a call for a 7 percent economic growth rate - and welcomed a Soviet call for a nuclear-free world. On Dec. 17, in the largest shake-up in party history, four prominent Communist leaders resigned or were dropped from the party Politburo during the sixth national Vietnamese Communist Party Congress. It was assumed by scholars and diplomats, as well as by some Vietnamese officials interviewed by journalists, that the former Politburo members would also lose their Government positions when the National Assembly met. Most Western journalists have been barred from reporting in Vietnam during the last few months. Resigned at Congress The leaders holding concurrent high party and governmental positions who resigned during the party congress were Pham Van Dong, the country's Chairman of the Council of Ministers, or Prime Minister, and Truong Chinh, the party's General Secretary and Chairman of the State Council, or President of Vietnam. Mr. Chinh was replaced as party General Secretary by Nguyen Van Linh. Le Duc Tho, a veteran party leader, also retired Dec. 17, and To Huu, a former deputy Prime Minister, was quietly dropped from the Politburo. Mr. Huu had already lost his Government job in a shake-up last June. In addition, Gen. Van Tien Dong, the country's Defense Minister, lost his Politburo seat during the party congress. Vietnamese exiles say he or members of his family may have been involved in corruption scnadals. He was also associated with the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. Vietnamese officials say new Government appointments can be made at any time. Some scholars believe they may come when there is less public attention focused on national meetings, or they could be postponed until June 1987, when a new assembly is due to be convened. Speculation Over Divisions There is considerable speculation that continuing divisions in the party are holding up the formation of a new government. According to the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, the new Politburo of the Vietnamese Communist Party, from whom the Government officials are likely to be named, is as follows: Full members in order of rank are Nguyen Van Linh, Pham Hung, Vo Chi Cong, Do Muoi, Vo Van Kiet, Le Duc Anh, Nguyen Duc Tam, Nguyen Co Thach, Dong Si Nguyen, Tran Xuan Bach, Nguyen Thanh Binh, Doan Khue and Mai Chi Tho. There is one alternate member, Dao Duy Tung. VIETNAM PARLEY ENDS
