258|1987\01\02|SPIRITUALS TO BE SUNG AT CARNEGIE|To bring a genre of music to a generation that may have heard only a few of its most celebrated works, a California-based arts organization will sponsor a program of spirituals sung by veterans of the concert stage tomorrow night at Carnegie Hall.|To bring a genre of music to a generation that may have heard only a few of its most celebrated works, a California-based arts organization will sponsor a program of spirituals sung by veterans of the concert stage tomorrow night at Carnegie Hall. To bring a genre of music to a generation that may have heard only a few of its most celebrated works, a California-based arts organization will sponsor a program of spirituals sung by veterans of the concert stage tomorrow night at Carnegie Hall. Mattiwilda Dobbs, a soprano with the Metropolitan Opera between 1956 and 1964, and the bass-baritone William Warfield, whose Porgy in a 1961 production of ''Porgy and Bess'' by the New York City Center Light Opera Company was highly acclaimed, will share the vocalizing with the soprano Lorice Stevens and the tenor Kenn Hicks. The program has been titled ''The Art of the Spiritual'' by its producer, W. Hazaiah Williams, founder and director of the 30-year-old San Francisco-based Today's Artists Concerts, a community arts group. Mr. Williams said he organized the program because ''here was one unique American art form which was running the risk of being lost, and certainly running the risk of being misunderstood as a historical musical form.'' He called the endeavor ''a rare event in musical history because these are actually slave songs; these songs originally came spontaneously from the slave community.'' 'The Need for a Change' And for any program of spirituals, there is a rich body of work to explore. John Lovell Jr., in his book ''Black Song: The Forge and the Flame - The Story of How the Afro-American Spiritual Was Hammered Out,'' said 6,000 spirituals have been catalogued, from ''After Death Got to Fill an Empty Grave'' to ''Zion's Walls.'' In his book, Mr. Lovell described these songs as ''religious and spiritual because they tried, with inspired artistry, to pose the root questions of life, of before life, and of beyond life, and to react to these questions as the aroused human being and the bestirred folk have done since the rosy dawn of literature.'' He said the fundamental theme of spirituals was ''the need for a change in the existing order.'' Spirituals have certainly been heard in concert halls before. But while many concert singers occasionally include them in their recitals, most emphasize the classical European facet of their repertory rather than indigenous American music. Mr. Warfield, however, can always be counted on to present a greater number of spirituals than most classical singers. ''Unfortunately,'' Mr. Warfield said recently, ''the spiritual went through a period of time, even with black artists, when they did not particularly use it. I have myself done solo recitals which have had to do with the spiritual. I think I'm one of the few who consistently always program the Negro spiritual as a part of my program. Even in my debut, I combined spirituals with 13th-century songs in Latin, almost in a modal tone, and interspersed spirituals with religious pieces dating back to the 13th century.'' Music and Literature Merge Mr. Williams, who said the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was a classmate at Boston University, has offered this program to commemorate the slain civil-rights leader's birthday, which is Jan. 15. Accompanying the singers will be the pianists William Duncan Allen and Eugene Gash. Denis Harper, the oboist, will also perform. The spirituals to be heard are by Roland Hayes, Hall Johnson, Harry T. Burleigh, William Dawson and Edward Boatner. Mr. Williams said these men, ''conservatory- and university-trained, made a major contribution by trying to capture the idiom, putting it in indigenous compositional form, which made it possible to transmit to coming generations. ''The beauty is that they were aware that in these songs that there was a strange merger of music and literature, wedded like the great art songs.'' Tickets for tomorrow night's recital, which starts at 8 P.M., are $5 to $12. They may be purchased at the Carnegie Hall box office. Information: 247-7800.
