259|1987\01\02|THE EVENING HOURS|ON the Upper West Side, Albert Bergeret, the young and energetic director of the Gilbert and Sullivan Players, was toasting his company's current season at Symphony Space and its planned move to the more commodious City Center next year. But a party before a show? John Reed, the renowned English actor who plays Bunthorne in the parody of Pre-Raphaelite litterateurs and poseurs called '|ON the Upper West Side, Albert Bergeret, the young and energetic director of the Gilbert and Sullivan Players, was toasting his company's current season at Symphony Space and its planned move to the more commodious City Center next year. But a party before a show? John Reed, the renowned English actor who plays Bunthorne in the parody of Pre-Raphaelite litterateurs and poseurs called ' ON the Upper West Side, Albert Bergeret, the young and energetic director of the Gilbert and Sullivan Players, was toasting his company's current season at Symphony Space and its planned move to the more commodious City Center next year. But a party before a show? John Reed, the renowned English actor who plays Bunthorne in the parody of Pre-Raphaelite litterateurs and poseurs called ''Patience,'' seemed unconcerned. Mr. Reed reminisced about his 28 years with the D'Oyly Carte company in Britain and ruminated on rumors of the troupe's rebirth. ''I don't miss it,'' he said. ''There was a time for it, and that time isn't anymore.'' Just as Mr. Reed was leaving the party at Hanratty's on Amsterdam Avenue for a brief respite before his performance, Jean Stapleton arrived an hour before her own Broadway curtain in ''Arsenic and Old Lace.'' Miss Stapleton made her G & S debut with Mr. Reed several years ago. Is there a new career waiting for Miss Stapleton? She said, ''I'd love to do Lady Jane in 'Patience,' who's always bemoaning how she's aging.'' THE Park Avenue Synagogue was abuzz the other night with the 53d Hanukkah party for hundreds of staff members, clients and friends of the Federation Employment and Guidance Service, the huge nonprofit agency that provides services to 70,000 New Yorkers. After Caroline K. Simon, a former state judge who is chairman of the federation's board, welcomed guests and children lighted a menorah, awards were presented to five employees, including Rakhil Cherfas, a Soviet emigre and a former client of the agency. Ms. Cherfas was beaming. ''It's wonderful to see Jewish people in yarmulkes celebrating,'' she said. ''We could never celebrate Hanukkah in Russia.'' But as the party ended, one thing reminded her son, David, of the Soviet Union - the long line snaking from the synagogue's catering room up the stairs to the coat-check room. ''WHAT more could I want than to be at the Waldorf-Astoria with a lot of pretty girls,'' said Tom Borowiec, an Air Force Academy cadet whose enviable assignment was to escort Princess Mandana Marian Hoveyda. He was one of the 106 military and civilian escorts for the 53 young women from 14 states and 12 countries who were making their debuts at the 32d International Debutante Ball. The ball, a benefit for the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Club and the Leukemia Society of America, was a carefully choreographed evening of good, clean, opulent fun. The debutantes in their white dresses began the evening with hundreds of handshakes. ''It seems like I've been on this receiving line for years,'' Danielle Saladino of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., lamented with a smile. The big moment came as the debutantes were announced, and each, flanked by one uniformed escort from one of the service academies and another in white tie, proceeded onto the great pink stage. For connoisseurs of curtsies, there were various styles, from dainty bows to the fabled Texas deep dips, performed to a chorus of ''yahoos.'' ''It makes me feel like time hasn't passed,'' said Anne Eisenhower, the mother of Adriana Echavarria-Eisenhower, a debutante who is a great-granddaughter of President Eisenhower. Mrs. Eisenhower, who was presented here a generation ago, said, ''Being in this same ballroom brings back lots of memories.'' AS fireworks transformed the night sky into a kaleidoscope, 4,000 runners, many in tuxedos, pink party hats or leotards, and hordes of spectators heralded the New Year in one of the city's most outrageous traditions, the eighth five-mile New Year's Eve race in Central Park. For some runners, such as Doug and Melanie McPhee, this was but an interlude in a night of partying. For others the race was the party. ''Why go someplace and have three drinks when you can run in the park at midnight?'' Albert Moljo said. Near the canopy of balloons that marked the finish line at Tavern on the Green, the women's winner, Wendy Sly, said she didn't stop at the ''aid station'' where champagne was served. ''The night's young,'' declared the British Olympic runner. The mood of many runners was summed up by Randy Velzen, who came from Grand Rapids, Mich., with Laurie Curtis: ''It's a real happening, and it's better than any New Year's Eve party.''
