262|1987\01\02|RELIGIOUS LEADERS FEAR DISPUTE'S EFFECT ON TIES|The controversy surrounding the trip to Israel by John Cardinal O'Connor is being viewed with deep concern by American religious figures who have labored in the last two decades in the field of Roman Catholic-Jewish relations.|The controversy surrounding the trip to Israel by John Cardinal O'Connor is being viewed with deep concern by American religious figures who have labored in the last two decades in the field of Roman Catholic-Jewish relations. The controversy surrounding the trip to Israel by John Cardinal O'Connor is being viewed with deep concern by American religious figures who have labored in the last two decades in the field of Roman Catholic-Jewish relations. At the same time, they have sought to put the O'Connor trip in perspective, noting that a great stride was made in relations between Catholics and Jews when Pope John Paul II visited a synagogue in Rome last April. The controversy arose when the Cardinal, under Vatican pressure, canceled meetings he had arranged with several high-ranking Israeli officials. The Vatican has indicated it objects principally to the idea that the Cardinal was to hold the meetings in Jerusalem, which it does not recognize as Israel's capital. The Vatican, like almost all countries, does not recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital. Lester Pollack, president of the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York, said, ''The 'unscheduling' of sessions with high-level Goverment officials in Jeruslaem, after going ahead with meetings with Jordan's King and other officials in Amman, signals a critical setback in the process of advancing understanding between the two faith groups.'' Relationship Called Sound Other Catholic and Jewish leaders echoed Mr. Pollack's statement, but preferred to emphasize that the relationship between American Catholics and Jews was a sound one that would survive this setback. ''Our discussions can't stop and won't stop,'' said Eugene J. Fisher, executive secretary of the Secretariat for Catholic-Jewish Relations at the National Conference of Catholic Bishops. The Vatican's refusal to establish full diplomatic relations with Israel or to acknowledge its sovereignty over Jersusalem has been central to the interfaith talks. Other issues broached in Catholic-Jewish exchanges have been abortion, parochial school aid and educational matters, such as the setting up of Holocaust curriculums and joint education programs for seminarians. Russell Shaw, a spokesman for the national bishops group, which represents the 300 American prelates, said it was ''sometimes difficult for non-Jews to understand the significance'' of Israel to Jews. By the same token, he said, ''there is a lack of appreciation on the Jewish side for the essentially benevolent policy that the Vatican is trying to play'' in the Middle East. Mr. Fisher said the O'Connor trip underlined the need for more discussion but he declined to call the incident a setback. ''It certainly is not a step forward,'' he added. A 'Blip' in the Progress Morris B. Abram, chairman of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, called the O'Connor incident a ''blip'' in what he said has been a growing understanding between Jews and Catholics, particularly in the United States. He noted that last year Catholics and Jews celebrated the 20th anniversary of ''Nostra Aetate,'' the declaration of the Second Vatican Council, which deplored anti-Semitism and marked the beginning of a new openness between Catholics and Jews. ''We never see progress without a blip,'' Mr. Abram said. ''And this is a blip. What is fundamental is that for the first time in 1,900 years a Pope visited a synagogue. What is fundamental is that the church says that the death of Jesus cannot be blamed on Jews in our times. What is fundamental is that Cardinal O'Connor joins us in New York in demonstrations to free Soviet Jewry.'' The Rev. Michael McGarry, the rector of Saint Paul's College in Washington, stressed that it was important that exchanges between American Catholics and Jews should continue because they could ultimately influence Vatican policy on Israel. ''If there is any chance for change in the Vatican view regarding Israel, it is going to come from the United States,'' said Father McGarry, who recently spent a year at Hebrew University in Jersualem and favors full diplomatic relations between Israel and the Vatican. No Long-Term Effect Seen He said that the case of Cardinal O'Connor, who is generally perceived as a conservative in the church, could be seen as another example of Rome's trying to assert control over American Catholic bishops in the manner that Archbishop Raymond G. Hunthausen of Seattle was disciplined last year for liberal policies. ''I wonder if the Vatican feels that United States Catholics have been too aggressive in Catholic-Jewish relations,'' Father McGarry said. ''Maybe this would be one more example of them saying, 'Hey, slow down a minute, we have a wider view of this.' '' Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler, president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, a Reform group that has emphasized discussions with Catholics, said he did not expect the O'Connor trip to have a long-term effect on Catholic-Jewish relations. He said the Jewish organizations were aware that there were ''elements'' in the Catholic world that were unfriendly to Israel. ''I think our good relations are strongest on the American scene,'' he said, adding that the American bishops ''are having their own problems with the Vatican.'' Rabbi Binyamin Walfish, the executive vice president of the Rabbinical Council of America, an Orthodox group that engages in talks with Catholics on social issues but not on theological matters, said the O'Connor trip was a lesson in the limits of Catholic-Jewish dialogue. ''We have to be more realistic about our relations with the church and realize that they have theological and religious considerations that supercede their relationship with the Jewish community and Israel,'' he said. Cardinal O'Connor has explained that he canceled appointments with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel and President Chaim Herzog at the direction of the Vatican. Several leading Catholics and Jews said they were baffled by the sudden change in plans, which came just before the Cardinal left for the Middle East on Saturday. Rabbi's Remarks Noted One theory - given credence in recent days by Mayor Koch and by an article in The Jerusalem Post - was that Vatican officials were concerned about a report in The New York Times on Dec. 22 that quoted Rabbi Marc Tanenbaum on the Cardinal's plans. Rabbi Tanenbaum, the international relations director for the American Jewish Committee, said Cardinal O'Connor hoped to make peace in the Middle East ''a central concern of his ministry.'' In a statement Tuesday, Dr. David M. Gordis, executive vice president of the committee, denied charges that the disclosure of the Cardinal's plans touched off the Vatican action. ''The curtailment of Cardinal O'Connor's schedule originated in the Vatican and not in New York,'' Dr. Gordis said. While some are trying to use Rabbi Tanenbaum's comments as ''a pretext,'' Dr. Gordis said, ''the responsibility for transforming what might have been a contribution to reconciliation and friendship into an embarrassment and humiliation lies squarely with those in the Vatican who for their own reasons have chosen this course.'' In another development, Dr. M. T. Mehdi, secretary general of the National Council on Islamic Affairs, praised the Vatican for curtailing Cardinal O'Connor's schedule. ''As American Moslems we are grateful that there is the Vatican which opposes on moral grounds the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem and other Palestinian lands,'' he said. Dr. Mehdi noted that several leading American Jews had called on Cardinal O'Connor not to go through with his trip if he could not meet with Israeli officials. Dr. Mehdi said that in part he concurred. ''We agree with the Jewish groups that possibly the Cardinal should cancel his visit to Israel. He will then be strengthening his moral opposition to that garrison state.''
