265|1987\01\02|MUSIC: VICTORIAN SONGS IN CARNEGIE HALL BENEFIT|TASTEFULLY festooned with antique furniture and other vintage bric-a-brac, the stage of Carnegie Hall was transformed into a roomy Victorian parlor on Wednesday night. The occasion, a New Year's Eve gala benefit for the hall, celebrating the restoration of its late-19th-century physical splendor, brought together classical and pop musicians for an old-time musical soiree of Victorian song and music.|TASTEFULLY festooned with antique furniture and other vintage bric-a-brac, the stage of Carnegie Hall was transformed into a roomy Victorian parlor on Wednesday night. The occasion, a New Year's Eve gala benefit for the hall, celebrating the restoration of its late-19th-century physical splendor, brought together classical and pop musicians for an old-time musical soiree of Victorian song and music. TASTEFULLY festooned with antique furniture and other vintage bric-a-brac, the stage of Carnegie Hall was transformed into a roomy Victorian parlor on Wednesday night. The occasion, a New Year's Eve gala benefit for the hall, celebrating the restoration of its late-19th-century physical splendor, brought together classical and pop musicians for an old-time musical soiree of Victorian song and music. The concert proceeded with one crucial glitch. Robert Tear, the Welsh tenor who was to have sung a dozen of the 18 songs listed in the program, was ''out of voice'' and unable to perform. Although the vastly revised program whipped up at the last minute hardly made the seamless period musicale that had originally been planned, its relative success was a testament to the flexibility and professionalism of the participating musicians: the baritone Benjamin Luxon and the pianist Marvin Hamlisch, and cameo guests Isaac Stern (violinist), Yo-Yo Ma (cellist), Richard Stoltzman (clarinetist), Nancy Allen (harpist) and Patricia Zandor (pianist). Mr. Luxon became the hero of the evening, introducing all the music with charming anecdotes and singing several songs in addition to his designated repertory. Generally speaking, Victorian parlor songs that have been passed down over the decades in songbooks are easy-to-sing offshoots of more elevated art song. Many were designed to be performed at informal at-home sing-alongs as well as on the concert stage. Melodies that are often drippingly sentimental carry lyrics that run to extremes of sentiment, fantasy and melodrama. As Mr. Luxon pointed out, wealthy empire-building Victorians reposing in their comfortable well-stuffed salons loved to romanticize faraway places. A prime example - and perhaps the loveliest song of the evening - was ''The Kashmiri Love Song'' (1903), Lawrence Hope and Amy Woodeforde-Finden's tale of an Englishwoman, married to a British general in India, who falls in love with the son of an Indian rajah. Mr. Luxon, who has a luscious quivering baritone, approached it with an affectionate warmth, neither hamming it up nor trying to squelch its sentimentality. Accompanied by Mr. Hamlisch, he brought a similar understanding to many well-known Victorian warhorses, including ''The Holy City,'' ''Home Sweet Home,'' and ''Love, Could I Only Tell You.'' The nonsingers skillfully filled in the program with instrumental tidbits that ranged from Fritz Kreisler's ''Liebeslied'' (played by Mr. Stern) to Mr. Hamlisch playing Scott Joplin's ''Entertainer.'' The evening's most beautiful single moment was Mr. Stoltzman and Ms. Allen's rendering of Saint-Saens's ''Swan.'' Its funniest was Mr. Stern and Mr. Hamlisch's humorously overblown treatment of ''If I Were a Rich Man,'' from ''Fiddler on the Roof.''
