267|1987\01\02|Bridge: Visitor Discovers Crocodile In the Land of the Alligator|Exactly what ''Crocodile Dundee'' was doing on the streets of New York City is no doubt clearer to those who have seen the movie than it is to this department. One might think that his chance of hunting down a large saurian in Manhattan would be about equal to the chances of the Australian star of the film, Paul Hogan, in his hometown of|Exactly what ''Crocodile Dundee'' was doing on the streets of New York City is no doubt clearer to those who have seen the movie than it is to this department. One might think that his chance of hunting down a large saurian in Manhattan would be about equal to the chances of the Australian star of the film, Paul Hogan, in his hometown of Exactly what ''Crocodile Dundee'' was doing on the streets of New York City is no doubt clearer to those who have seen the movie than it is to this department. One might think that his chance of hunting down a large saurian in Manhattan would be about equal to the chances of the Australian star of the film, Paul Hogan, in his hometown of Sydney. Another Australian visiting the United States recently discovered a crocodile in a place where one would expect to find an alligator: Miami Beach. South was Pauline Gumby of Sydney, and she and her Australian partner, Peter Fordham, were playing in the 1986 World Mixed Pair Championship. The bidding ended with a hungry match-point double of four diamonds. This was an accurate assessment in a way, because nine tricks seems to be the theoretical limit for each partnership, playing in the appropriate red suit. But South was not without chances in four diamonds. South ruffed the second heart lead, drew trumps and led a club to the jack. East took the ace and shifted to the spade queen, which was won with the ace. South played clubs and ruffed the fourth round in his hand to reach this ending: When South led a spade, Miss Gumby opened her jaws wide, played her king and swallowed her partner's jack to defeat the contract and vindicate the double. Obviously East would have been fatally end-played if she had routinely played a low spade so the crocodile coup was essential. But how did she know it was the right moment to look for a crocodile in a place of alligators? Her play would have been fatal if East had begun with a small spade instead of the jack. Miss Gumby placed her faith in her partner's expertise. If he had begun with Q-small in spades, he would have returned the small card, not the queen, at the sixth trick.
