268|1987\01\02|FOSS TO OFFER NIETZSCHE COMPOSITION|Lukas Foss, that indefatigable exhumer of symphonic rarities, has done it again. This weekend, he will offer what is billed as the first United States performances of Friedrich Nietzsche's choral cantata ''Hymn to Life.''|Lukas Foss, that indefatigable exhumer of symphonic rarities, has done it again. This weekend, he will offer what is billed as the first United States performances of Friedrich Nietzsche's choral cantata ''Hymn to Life.'' Lukas Foss, that indefatigable exhumer of symphonic rarities, has done it again. This weekend, he will offer what is billed as the first United States performances of Friedrich Nietzsche's choral cantata ''Hymn to Life.'' Yes, the Nietzsche, the late-19th-century German who is best (if inaccurately) known for his philosophy of the Superman. As Lincoln Kirstein argued eloquently in a recent New Yorker article, Nietzsche's brilliant insights were twisted by his sister after his death, creating a false image of bullying bravado that pointed toward Nazism. The real Nietzsche was a philosopher of morals and esthetics. But he also played the piano and composed in his youth, he inspired later composers (Mahler, Strauss, Delius), and his complex relationship with Richard Wagner - first adoration, then fierce polemical opposition - helped set the stage for the post-Romantic reaction and the advent of Modernism. ''Hymn to Life'' is a seven-minute setting for chorus and orchestra of a poem by Lou Salome, better known by her subsequent married name of Lou Andreas-Salome. This remarkable woman became the romantic ideal of Nietzsche, Rilke, Freud, Strindberg, Hauptmann and Wedekind, who made her the model for his Lulu character, subsequently translated into Louise Brooks's most famous film portrayal and Berg's opera. She was no mere temptress; Nietzsche called her ''by far the most intelligent person I have ever met.'' Romantic Ecstatic Rhetoric The bulk of Nietzsche's compositional efforts were songs and other miniatures in his youth, between 1854 and 1874. He met the young Lou Salome in 1882, and shortly thereafter set her poem ''Hymnus an das Leben'' for chorus and wind ensemble; it was published in 1887 in a symphonic expansion by his friend Peter Gast, which is the version to be heard in Brooklyn. The poem is pure late Romantic ecstatic rhetoric, in which the speaker's self-abnegating commitment to ''life'' is expressed in terms of overheated personal passion. When Gast read the poem, according to Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau in his book ''Wagner and Nietzsche,'' he assumed Nietzsche himself had written it. Under Wagner's spell, Nietzsche could think of no other music, and his post-Wagnerian revulsion took the form of a clinging to all things light, balanced and Mediterranean, Bizet and ''Carmen'' being his favorites. His early compositions, however, reveal more of Schumann's influence than any other, and Mr. Foss said he feels the ''Hymn to Life'' falls between Schumann and early Wagner in style. ''My father was a professor of philosophy,'' the conductor (himself a composer) recalled the other day. ''I heard about Nietzsche when I was a child over the breakfast table, and I remember how my father said that in his youth, Nietzsche couldn't decide between being a composer, a poet and a philosopher. ''Later I learned he had sent an early composition called 'Nirvana' to Wagner, who told him it looked 'delightfully familiar,' which I thought wasn't very kind of Wagner. Maybe that discouraged Nietzsche from composing further. The Nietzsche archives had no record of 'Nirvana,' so we decided on 'Hymn to Life' instead.'' Other Rarities The Nietzsche premiere, and the way it fits in with the rest of this weekend's program, is but another example of Mr. Foss's ingenuity as a program builder. ''I realize I can't explore a lot of unfamiliar names in a subscription series, or we lose subscribers,'' he said ruefully. ''Subscription audiences want to see the great names. So my problem becomes, how can I still be adventurous and not be repetitive? So I just use my mind to find less familiar things by familiar names.'' This weekend's concerts, devoted to the general theme of German Romanticism, contain two other rarities. There will be the first New York performances of Anton Webern's early, Romantic ''Three Orchestral Studies on a Ground,'' which uses material heard in different form in the composer's Passacaglia (Op. 1). There will also be the conductor Felix Mottl's orchestral arrangement of a Beethoven song, ''Die Ehre Gottes aus der Natur.'' The more familiar items on the bill will be Schumann's Piano Concerto, with Bella Davidovich as soloist, and Beethoven's Symphony No. 7. The Grace Choral Society of Brooklyn will sing in the Nietzsche cantata. The three performances of this program are at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and Sunday at 2 P.M. Tickets cost $20, $16 and $10, and are available at the academy box office or through Teletron, 947-5850. Information: (718) 636-4120.
