286|1987\01\02|Resolutions For Others|It seems better to me to make New Year's resolutions for other people. Then you don't have to feel guilty when they aren't kept. Here are some possibilities:|It seems better to me to make New Year's resolutions for other people. Then you don't have to feel guilty when they aren't kept. Here are some possibilities: It seems better to me to make New Year's resolutions for other people. Then you don't have to feel guilty when they aren't kept. Here are some possibilities: President Reagan - I will stop dreaming of anything but Nancy and leave visions of a Star Wars perfect missile defense and of moderate mullahs to the script writers for films that I'll never make. Next time I see Mikhail Gorbachev, I will make sure there is a full transcript of our talks. Ayatollah Khomeini - I will try to buy my weapons from Iraq's President. He is a greater enemy than the U.S. and Israel, and what do I care if he wants to use the profits for guerrillas in the Philippines or to fight drug dealers in Colombia? Mikhail Gorbachev - Next time I'll insist on going to Palm Springs instead of Iceland, and I won't leave until Mr. Reagan signs on the dotted line. If he refuses, I'll invite him to Chernobyl. Eugene Hasenfus - I will make sure to carry a calling card of Lieut. Col. Oliver North with me whenever I get in an airplane. That way if anything happens, he will be the hostage and I will be sent straight home. Colonel North - I will never trust Swiss bankers, and I will never hand out another business card. Daniel Ortega Saavedra - If Iran insists on financing the contras against our Sandinstas, I will take Iranian hostages and sell them back to finance the Communists in Iran. Secretary of State George Shultz -I will not allow the President to tell me what the White House is doing. It could be embarrassing. Anyway, does Macy's tell its competitors? Government and the State Department don't mix. Vice President George Bush -Now that I'm no longer the front-runner, maybe I'll just run for Vice President. There are a lot less headaches in this office. Lee Iacocca - I'll keep saying that I do not choose to run until the budget is out of the red. There's no way Chrysler can bail out the Federal Government, and I've got my reputation to think of. Donald Regan - Obviously, the shovel brigade didn't have enough shovels to get the mess out of sight. We'll buy more and more, Gramm-Rudman be damned. If I lose my job, I can always sign on with Barnum & Bailey. I've proven qualifications. President Francois Mitterrand -How can I get some of Donald Regan's shovels into Jacques Chirac's hands? Or should I make him student leader of the year? Premier Jacques Chirac - I won't send Mr. Mitterrand any more decrees. That way he can't upstage me by refusing to sign them. And every time I buy back a hostage, I'll make sure Washington does it first and pays more, so everyone will see that I got a bargain. President Hafez al-Assad - I'll have nothing more to do with Lebanon until all the factions there make up their minds once and for all which side they're on. Maybe I should send for the Nicaraguan contras to unite everybody else. Kurt Waldheim - I'll write a new autobiography before I run for president of Austria again. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher - I'll get a punk hair-do and a mini-skirt and run as the new Maggie. They might not like it in the shires, but it will bring flocks of tourists and do wonders for the pound. President Botha - I'll abolish the television, the press, the courts and the unions. It's the only way to save freedom and democracy in South Africa. Any American congressmen who voted for sanctions will be welcome to come and stay. We'll make sure they don't vote again. President Mobutu Sese Seko - As a gesture of good will, I'll offer Washington lessons in how to divert billions, not paltry millions, to Switzerland and keep it out of the press. It's time for Zaire to show its gratitude for aid past. President Corazon Aquino - I'll go right on the way I'm going, they haven't got me down yet. Imelda Marcos can have all her shoes back if she wants, she and Ferdinand aren't going anywhere any longer. General Juan Ponce Enrile - I'll nver join another revolt against a sitting president. It's the running one I have to worry about catching up with. Deng Xiaoping - I will make sure that students have plenty of ink and paper for posters. It will keep them off the streets and brighten up city walls. And I will arrange for a lot of Big Mac franchises. Students with their mouths stuffed can't shout. Andrei Sakharov - Now that I'm back home and can speak my mind, I'll wish everyone a happy and peaceful New Year. It's what you don't know and can't say that hurts you. FOREIGN AFFAIRS
