287|1987\01\02|DURBAN POLICE QUELL MOB WITH BIRDSHOT|The police fired tear gas and birdshot to disperse looters on a black beach, and a black mob attacked a train and killed an Indian youth during a New Year's Day of racial violence on the Indian Ocean coast. Editor's Note: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or ''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.|The police fired tear gas and birdshot to disperse looters on a black beach, and a black mob attacked a train and killed an Indian youth during a New Year's Day of racial violence on the Indian Ocean coast. The police fired tear gas and birdshot to disperse looters on a black beach, and a black mob attacked a train and killed an Indian youth during a New Year's Day of racial violence on the Indian Ocean coast. Seven blacks were wounded by the birdshot, according to a police statement issued about 10 hours after the violence began today on Clover Leaf Beach, an area set aside for blacks near Indian beaches in Durban. Witnesses reported about 500 blacks were involved in daylong outbreaks with about 100 Indian sunbathers on two adjoining beaches. The crowds surged back and forth along the beaches. An estimated 20,000 people were on the black beach, and the Indian beaches were packed as temperatures in the 80's brought out huge holiday crowds. Swarms of bluebottle flies added to the tension, and 300 people were reported treated for stings. Lifeguards Escorted Out One witness, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said lifeguards at the black beach locked themselves in their offices to escape attack until they were escorted out by police officers. A police helicopter was used to spot trouble on Durban's beaches as about 500 soldiers, city police officers and South African Police, a nationwide group, patrolled the area in armored vehicles and on foot. There were no reports of whites taking part in the fighting. Meanwhile, the South African Police said in a statement that at Winklespruit, 18 miles south of Durban, ''an Indian youth was stabbed to death when commuters on board a train became angry when it stopped too long at a signal.'' 'Crowd Stoned Train' ''The crowd stoned the train, smashing several windows and then rushed through a caravan park where the youth was stabbed,'' said the police statement. ''Several parked vehicles at the railway station were also damaged.'' The police statement did not mention the race of the people in the crowd, but witnesses said they were black. The police statement on the Durban disturbance said the police ''were forced to use birdshot to disperse a mob which had repeatedly robbed an ice cream kiosk at a Durban beach.'' Witnesses said the birdshot was fired at Clover Leaf Beach. Four robberies or attempted lootings occurred at the kiosk during the day, the statement said. ''Police first used tear gas in an attempt to disperse the crowds who then began stoning the police.'' Snack Stands Looted Other sources who spoke on condition of anonymity reported at least three snack stands at the black and the Indian beaches were looted during the day and one was demolished. Preliminary, unconfirmed reports indicated six to nine people were treated at Addington Hospital, a white facility, and there was a report an Indian woman was stabbed near Clover Leaf. Although the violence was not connected with unrest under the state of emergency, the police referred calls to the Government's Bureau for Information, which referred them back to the police. Officers refused to give information throughout the day when reached by telephone. One report suggested the trouble began when blacks carrying banners arrived at Sunkist, an Indian beach, but there was no confirmation of that. By law and custom, apartheid establishes a racially segregated society in which South Africa's 24 million blacks have no vote in national affairs. The 5 million whites control the economy and maintain separate districts, schools and health services. Editor's Note: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or ''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.
