290|1987\01\02|LAW ON EMIGRATION IN EFFECT IN SOVIET|American officials remain concerned that recent steps by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to liberalize some elements of Soviet society may not touch restrictions on emigration, a major obstacle in relations between the two countries.|American officials remain concerned that recent steps by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to liberalize some elements of Soviet society may not touch restrictions on emigration, a major obstacle in relations between the two countries. American officials remain concerned that recent steps by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to liberalize some elements of Soviet society may not touch restrictions on emigration, a major obstacle in relations between the two countries. Emigration from the Soviet Union in general is heavily restricted, and the State Department estimates that only 30,000 to 40,000 people would be eligible to leave under a new emigration law that took effect today, according to Richard Schifter, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. ''I have heard disparaging remarks from Soviet officials about the migration policies of the Brezhnev era, that they were disorganized and 'What did we get for it?' '' Mr. Schifter said. He was alluding to the former Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, who, as an exception to the general curbs on emigration, allowed 260,000 Jews to leave from 1969 through 1979. Soviet officials have said that ''they are not going back - no large-scale emigration,'' Mr. Schifter reported. Previous Official Hints Recalled Last fall, before the text of the new law became known in the West, there was a hint from a Soviet official that a rise in emigration was possible, Mr. Schifter said in an interview. ''It was not a clear statement; it was a vague hint,'' he recalled. Another Administration specialist speculated that there could be a onetime surge in emigration under the new law until the reservoir of those eligible was empty. The Soviet Union's continuing barriers on free emigration and foreign travel in general have been a counterpoint to the relaxation that has occurred under Mr. Gorbachev, represented most recently by his ending the exile of Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and human rights advocate. Other political prisoners have been freed. The Soviet press has been given increased latitude to debate public issues, and there has been some loosening of restrictions on film and theater, including some frank productions about the Stalin era. New Chapter in De-Stalinization Stephen F. Cohen, a professor of Soviet politics at Princeton, sees this as a second chapter in de-Stalinization, the first of which was written by Nikita S. Khrushchev in 1956 when he denounced Stalin's repressive policies. ''Gorbachev is trying to rally the intelligentsia that share his values and his views to his side,'' Professor Cohen said. ''I saw with my own eyes people in Moscow. Established reform intelligentsia were just elated.'' If no steps are taken by Mr. Gorbachev to relax movement across the Soviet border, the domestic changes may not affect the political dynamics between Washington and Moscow, for the emigration issue occupies an important place among the irritants in Soviet-American relations. Under American law, relaxation of emigration restrictions is a prerequisite for easing trade barriers with the Soviet Union. And when it comes to the emigration of Jews, no other human rights question has such a well-organized American constituency. U.S. Jewish Groups Active Groups such as the National Conference on Soviet Jewry and the Union of Councils for Soviet Jews conduct intensive information and lobbying campaigns with the Administration, Congress, the public and news organizations, and they have threatened to stage demonstrations if Mr. Gorbachev ever visits the United States. Among the exceptions to the curbs on Soviet emigration have been not only Jews, but other minorities such as Armenians and ethnic Germans. The flow of Jews, in particular, reached a peak of more than 51,000 in 1979, but dropped to 914 in 1986, according to the National Conference on Soviet Jewry. The exceptions have usually been allowed on the ground of ''family reunification,'' with Soviet citizens permitted to join relatives abroad, often distant or even fictitious kin. What has made the new law more restrictive is that the definition of family has now been narrowed to close relatives, such as a parent, sibling, child or spouse. The law contains a section barring discrimination on racial, ethnic, religious or other grounds. This has been interpreted abroad as ending the preference given to Jews in the past. Now, Mr. Schifter said, the 30,000 to 40,000 people estimated to have close relatives abroad include Jews, Armenians, ethnic Germans, Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonians and Ukrainians. It is not known how many of them would want to emigrate. Fewer Jews Are Being Held In the midst of Mr. Gorbachev's liberalization, Jewish campaigners in the emigration movement have had mixed experiences, according to Jerry Goodman, executive director of the National Conference. No Jewish activist has been arrested, tried and imprisoned since last summer, Mr. Goodman said, although some have been locked up for 15 days on charges of hooliganism. The number of Jewish campaigners in prison is down to 14, ''the lowest in many years,'' he said. The usual level has been about two dozen. At least four of the prisoners have been beaten, according to information reaching here. In addition, ''There has been a lot of harassment of Jews in the religious sphere,'' Mr. Goodman noted. Those attending study sessions after services in synagogues have been threatened with arrest, he said, as have Hebrew teachers.
