293|1987\01\02|SENEGAL HAILS VENDOR HOME FROM 5TH AVE.|Up and down the twisting alleys and crowded stalls of Dakar's Sandaga market, Cheikh Ndiaye is known as ''the man who came back from New York.''|Up and down the twisting alleys and crowded stalls of Dakar's Sandaga market, Cheikh Ndiaye is known as ''the man who came back from New York.'' Up and down the twisting alleys and crowded stalls of Dakar's Sandaga market, Cheikh Ndiaye is known as ''the man who came back from New York.'' Resplendent in his gold bracelets, gold-rimmed sunglasses and freshly embroidered tunic, Mr. Ndiaye is treated with respect. He returned home from New York this month after working for two years selling scarves, purses and sunglasses on ''Cinquieme Avenue,'' (''Fifth Avenue.'') ''They always ask about the cold,'' Mr. Ndiaye said of other vendors who eagerly inquire about peddling conditions in New York. ''I say you buy three pairs of socks, two pullovers and a coat, and you'll be O.K.'' Mr. Ndiaye is part of a wave of Senagalese vendors who have spread in recent years, first through West Africa, then to Europe and now to New York. Drought Among the Causes In Dakar, the phenomenon is attributed to a combination of causes: the ending of exit visa requirements for Senegalese citizens in 1981, a severe drought that devastated peanut farmers from 1973 to 1985, and a knack among people of this West African nation for trading. ''The caravans that used to cross the Sahara with salt are now being reinvented on the jumbo jet,'' said Abdou Rahmane Cisse, information director for the Sengalese Government. New York is an increasingly popular destination. For $600, a Senegalese can fly round trip from here to New York, only slightly more than for the round trip flight to Paris. ''The number of visa applications has gone right off the scale,'' Betsy L. Anderson, United States Consul here, said. In two years, the number of applicants for nonresident visas has jumped from 300 to 800 a month, she said. About 75 percent of the applications are denied, the Consul said. Mr. Cisse, who directs several researchers studying the vendors, said he became intrigued by the phenomenon when he was asked by about 10 passengers on an Air Afrique flight from Dakar to New York to fill out their landing cards. The passengers could speak only Wolof, Senegal's principal language. Day of Shopping in New York The traders told him they planned to spend the day in New York shops, mostly buying electronic goods and cosmetics for black people, and then return to Dakar in the evening. ''New York has become a commercial suburb of Dakar,'' the information director said. ''You cross the big lake, make your purchases, and then come home the same day.'' The second type of vendor, more familiar to New Yorkers, is Dakar's ''bana-bana,'' or street peddler. These vendors, Mr. Cisse said, are often illiterate men from Diourbel, Senegal's peanut farming region. Many are ''mourids,'' followers of a Moslem sect that stresses hard work. Brother Sells Women's Shoes At Sandaga market, Mr. Ndiaye, 36 years old, was found on a recent afternoon minding his brother's stall, which was lined from floor to ceiling with women's shoes. To attract customers, a tape deck blared the electrified Wolof rhythms of a Senegalese pop singer, Youssou Ndour. Mr. Ndiaye said he was a mourid from a family of peanut growers in Diourbel. ''I went to New York to have some money,'' the lanky vendor said over a Sprite, a taste acquired during his years in Manhattan. ''With the drought, Senegal wasn't working out.'' The solution for Mr. Ndiaye's family was to pool their money and buy him a ticket to New York. Arriving in August 1984, he started selling sunglasses on Fifth Avenue. At night, he shared a room with two other Senegalese vendors in the Bryant Hotel at 54th Street and Broadway for $12 a head a night. By charging a 25 percent markup on the sunglasses, scarves, belts and purses he bought wholesale, he said, he was able to put aside $35 to $45 every month to send home. Four Depended on Him ''They were very pleased,'' he said of his mother, wife, daughter and younger brother who live in Dakar and depended on his remittances for survival. Mr. Ndiaye, who hopes to return to New York in January on another family-financed ticket, said other vendors at Sandaga often asked him for tips on New York market conditions. ''Scarves are good in December, but by January, they all have them,'' he said. ''Tourists are best. Most New Yorkers are used to the merchandise.'' ''The best spots are on Fifth Avenue across from that Saks store and near the big church,'' he recounted. Mr. Ndiaye, a Moslem, said that in the two years spent working on Fifth Avenue he never ventured into St. Patrick's Cathedral.
