295|1987\01\02|About Real Estate; Developer Moves Back to Queens From Long Island|IN the building profession, glamour does not always pay off. That is a lesson that Herbert Ingber says he learned after a six-year stint in Muttontown, L.I., where he and his son-in-law, Ronald Stromfeld, built custom homes priced as high as $1 million.|IN the building profession, glamour does not always pay off. That is a lesson that Herbert Ingber says he learned after a six-year stint in Muttontown, L.I., where he and his son-in-law, Ronald Stromfeld, built custom homes priced as high as $1 million. IN the building profession, glamour does not always pay off. That is a lesson that Herbert Ingber says he learned after a six-year stint in Muttontown, L.I., where he and his son-in-law, Ronald Stromfeld, built custom homes priced as high as $1 million. ''What with the decorators, consulting architects and engineers, it would take us over two years from the time we signed the contract to the time we delivered the house,'' Mr. Ingber said. Now he has moved back to Queens - where he developed housing for 15 years before going to Nassau County - and he is spot-building mostly low-rise residences on speculation. ''The people here aren't so demanding,'' he said. ''They appreciate what they see and don't care about custom colors.'' His current focus is the Corona section, an area in the north of the borough that has not seen much new construction in recent years. Mr. Ingber has owned a real estate company there since 1945, giving him early opportunity to buy vacant or underdeveloped lots as soon as they become available. Now under construction are three attached, three-family homes in a boxy building, made of a roughly textured red brick, on Nicolls Avenue near 102d Street. Each house has two three-bedroom apartments and one two-bedroom unit, with 1,100 square feet in each apartment. The houses will have an asking price of $450,000 to $500,000 when they go on sale in March. Ordinarily, Mr. Ingber said, a buyer occupies one apartment and rents out the others for about $1,000 a month each. Ingber Development bought the 8,500-square-foot tract, which came with a house on the extreme western edge, for $350,000. It then resold the house and a smaller yard for $230,000, keeping the remaining land, which now measures 60 by 100 feet. ''By spinning off the house, we were able to reduce the cost of the three lots,'' he said. Mr. Ingber started building in Corona in the mid-1960's. But since then property prices have risen tremendously. Mr. Ingber remembers selling a house through his real estate concern, Veterans Realty, for $58,000. He recently bought the same house for $285,000. In addition, his land costs generally run about $150,000. ''Fifteen years ago,'' he said, ''we used to buy plots for $2,500.'' Mr. Ingber and Mr. Stromfeld are also doing a rental building in Corona, at 40-50 Junction Boulevard, a block from Roosevelt Avenue. It will have eight commercial apartments, for use as medical or legal offices, and eight one-bedroom apartments. The commercial units will rent for $2,000 a month, while the residential apartments are expected to command $750. ''Here, we are more interested in doing something from a design point of view,'' said Leo D. Fakler of Fakler/Eliason Architects & Planners of Queens, who handles Ingber Development's buildings. ''This will have an art-deco facade, and we're going to use a great deal of stucco.'' The building, on a 5,000-square-foot parcel, is scheduled for a fall opening. Ingber Development is now assembling land on 97th Street near Junction Boulevard. It has bought three one-family houses, to be demolished in April to create six lots for a complex of six attached, three-family homes. Part of his success in Corona has to do with the proximity to the Corona Plaza-103d Street subway station, which is within close walking distance of all of his developments there. Barring delays, a ride into Manhattan on the No. 7 train takes about 25 minutes. His Corona endeavors have caused fewer headaches, too. ''In Nassau County, we would have already started buiding the house when an interior decorator would come in and tell us to move the walls around,'' he said. ''In Queens, what they see is what they get.''
