297|1987\01\02|Medical Goods Look Profitable|Numerous companies in the medical supplies industry have good prospects, according to an analysis by the Value Line Investment Survey.|Numerous companies in the medical supplies industry have good prospects, according to an analysis by the Value Line Investment Survey. Numerous companies in the medical supplies industry have good prospects, according to an analysis by the Value Line Investment Survey. ''A weaker dollar should stimulate sales abroad, while a more stable hospital admissions rate augurs well for domestic performance,'' the investment advisory service said. ''Quality should remain the principal selling feature of products serving specialty health care markets, so most companies probably will enjoy healthy margins. And a lower corporate tax rate will give profits an extra lift.'' Long-range prospects are also considered favorable. ''Changes in the health care markets over the next few years will probably offer new opportunities for innovative products,'' Value Line said. ''Notably, the burgeoning home health care market will require equipment that will enable patients to be treated under limited supervision.'' Within the medical supplies category, the advisory service has selected 11 stocks that are expected to outperform the market over the coming year. Carrying the highest ''timeliness'' rating are five issues: C. R. Bard, Biomet, Intermedics, Medtronic and Puritan-Bennett. In addition, stocks regarded as having ''a better-than-even chance'' of beating the market during 1987 are Abbott Laboratories, Bausch & Lomb, Johnson & Johnson, R. P. Scherer, Stryker and United States Surgical. In discussing specialty product niches, the report noted that ''growing acceptance of angioplasty for treating obstructed blood vessels of heart attack patients is helping C. R. Bard to post record earnings.'' Medtronic and Intermedics are benefiting from increasing sales of cardiac pacemakers, the survey said. Scherer is counting on a nutritional approach to the cardiovascular field, offering fish oil supplements that are said to reduce blood cholesterol levels. Puritan-Bennett is seen extending its home health care product line, ''while it launches a computer-based data collection system that should improve the efficiency of respiratory therapy departments in hospitals.'' Tobacco Stocks Favored Tobacco stocks have consistently been one of the equity market's most profitable groups during the 1980's and Salomon Brothers expects this pattern to continue in 1987. For the five years ending in 1985, for example, the tobacco industry showed the highest return on equity of all groups in Standard & Poor's 400-stock industrial index. During this period, the industry's return on equity averaged 20.3 percent. The drug industry ranked second with a return on equity of 19.2 percent, followed by the publishing group with 18.6 percent. The average showing for 29 industries was a return on equity of 12.1 percent for the five years. ''We believe that the tobacco industry will continue to be one of the leaders in profitability, based on projected earnings growth of 16 percent in 1986 and 26 percent in 1987,'' said Diana K. Temple, who follows tobacco issues for Salomon Brothers. ''This would compare with the flat earnings we expect for the S.& P. 400 in 1986 and the 22 percent expansion - before write-offs - we look for in 1987.'' According to the firm's investment coding, stocks of four tobacco companies are expected to outperform the general equity market during the next 6 to 12 months. These are the Loews Corporation, Philip Morris, RJR Nabisco and U.S. Tobacco. Two other issues - American Brands and Universal Leaf Tobacco - are expected to match the market's overall performance. Merrill Turns Cautious Merrill Lynch suggests a cautious approach to investing as the new year begins. ''We sense that 1987 will be a year of change and greater risk but not the end of the bull market for financial assets,'' said Robert J. Farrell, Merrill Lynch's chief market analyst, in assessing prospects last week. ''We think it makes sense to move cautiously at the outset and hold reserves, even though we think a good rally to start the year, as stocks rebound from tax selling, could be appealing to traders.'' Mr. Farrell has an extensive list of stock groups that he favors for the new year. The sectors include electrical equipment, airlines, auto accessory, chemical, paper and forest products, containers, pollution control, computer software and services, tires, mobile homes, office supplies, telephone, natural gas and selected drugs. Recently, Merrill Lynch market analysts have cited the likelihood that the Dow Jones industrial average could decline to as low as 1,700 or 1,750 -possibly in the first quarter of 1987 - before the bull market moves to new highs. MARKET PLACE
