302|1987\01\02|IN HARLEM, A HOUSE FOR RARE AND ANCIENT DOLLS|Lenon Holder Hoyte's ''babies,'' as she refers to them, are made of bisque and china, rather than sugar and spice. But they are more than just dolls to Mrs. Hoyte, the owner and curator of Aunt Len's Doll and Toy Museum in Harlem. They are a livelihood.|Lenon Holder Hoyte's ''babies,'' as she refers to them, are made of bisque and china, rather than sugar and spice. But they are more than just dolls to Mrs. Hoyte, the owner and curator of Aunt Len's Doll and Toy Museum in Harlem. They are a livelihood. Lenon Holder Hoyte's ''babies,'' as she refers to them, are made of bisque and china, rather than sugar and spice. But they are more than just dolls to Mrs. Hoyte, the owner and curator of Aunt Len's Doll and Toy Museum in Harlem. They are a livelihood. What began as a hobby for Mrs. Hoyte has become a museum of more than 5,000 rare and antique dolls, displayed in glass cases in the living room, the dining room and the basement of her home at 6 Hamilton Terrace. The museum is open to visitors by appointment only. Mrs. Hoyte, 81 years old, began her collection in 1962, after displaying dolls at a charity show for Harlem Hospital. Today, Mrs. Hoyte, a Manhattan native who taught in New York City public schools for 41 years, is the manager and tour guide of her museum, which officially opened in 1974. What determines a doll's worth varies, depending upon its age, condition, manufacturer and the popularity of its genre. ''The value of a doll is determined by the quality of the bisque and whether it is wearing its original clothing,'' said Dana Hawkes, head of the collectibles department at Sotheby's in Manhattan. In the early 19th century, dolls were primarily made of bisque (unglazed ceramic ware), according to Ms. Hawkes, and before that, they were crafted from wood. In the past decade antique dolls have gained in popularity as collectibles. ''When dolls started fetching more than $1,000, beginning in the 1970's, it was fairly significant,'' Ms. Hawkes said. ''People can be pretty nostalgic.'' Mrs. Hoyte owns more than 100 dolls that have won prizes at annual shows by the United Federation of Doll Clubs. She was one of the first blacks to join the federation, which has its headquarters in Parkville, Mo. In December, Mrs. Hoyte was presented with an Ethnic New Yorker Award by Mayor Koch. The awards are given in recognition of outstanding efforts at improving the quality of life in the city. Well Known by Collectors According to Krystyna Goddu, editor of Dolls: The Collector's Magazine, Mrs. Hoyte's name is legendary in the collectors' world for her extensive display of early French bisque dolls and rare black dolls. Most valuable collections include Queen Anne dolls (wooden dolls made in the late 18th century), papier-mache dolls and early French Jumeau and Bru dolls (named for their manufacturers), Mrs. Goddu said. And Mrs. Hoyte's collection contains all of these. Mrs. Hoyte's black dolls are probably her most valuable. Most were made in Europe in the 19th century for the American market, and many typify the stereotypes of the day -for example, the exaggerated features of the Aunt Jemima dolls on display. Current Editions In contrast, the current editions of black dolls such as the Huggy Bean, made in 1985 by a Manhattan manufacturer specializing in black dolls, are attractive representations of real people. This doll is on display as well. One of Mrs. Hoyte's favorites - a baby doll in a dress with wide eyes and long eyelashes - was crafted in mahogany in 1977 by a California artist, Patty Hale. Mrs. Hoyte bought the doll last August at a doll convention in Chicago, but most of the items in her collection were purchased at flea markets and art shows in New York City. The history of a doll can increase its value. Mrs. Hoyte owns two papier-mache dolls, Lillian and Leo, made by Leo Moss, a black handyman who lived in Atlanta during the late 19th century. As the story goes, after Mr. Moss and his wife and children parted, he was so grief-stricken that he would only make dolls with tears - Lillian and Leo are two examples. Crying dolls of this type are now exceedingly rare, Mrs. Goddu said. Julie Collier, head of the collectibles department at Christie's in Manhattan, said early French dolls are currently the most in demand. Christie's began selling dolls on a regular basis in the mid-1960's and now holds doll sales four times a year. ''A French Bru doll 20 years ago would have sold for about $200,'' Ms. Collier said. ''Now, the same doll would run for about $8,000 to $12,000.'' But the average price for an antique doll in good condition is $300, she said. By this yardstick, Mrs. Hoyte's collection is quite valuable, but the museum owner would not estimate its worth. What one pays for dolls does not guarantee value, said Shirley Buchholz, a past president of United Federation of Doll Clubs. ''Lots of very fine dolls, dolls that have been well maintained and have retained their original clothing, are not necessarily the most expensive dolls,'' she said. According to Mrs. Hoyte, all a doll needs to make it a collectors' item is a past. ''Dolls are special because they have a history,'' she said. ''You can see it in their clothing and the blush of their faces.'' For an appointment to visit Aunt Len's museum, call 212-926-4172. Admission is $2 for adults, $1 for children.
