306|1987\01\02|FLINT AUTO PLANT QUIET 50 YEARS AFTER THE SITDOWNS, BUT NEW BATTLES LOOM|The big weatherbeaten factories known here as Fisher 1 and Fisher 2 stand silent and empty under the gray skies of a Michigan winter. Fifty years ago today, though, this was the scene of bravado, determination and tense confrontation as a struggle between capital and labor took place that would change the way industrial|The big weatherbeaten factories known here as Fisher 1 and Fisher 2 stand silent and empty under the gray skies of a Michigan winter. Fifty years ago today, though, this was the scene of bravado, determination and tense confrontation as a struggle between capital and labor took place that would change the way industrial The big weatherbeaten factories known here as Fisher 1 and Fisher 2 stand silent and empty under the gray skies of a Michigan winter. Fifty years ago today, though, this was the scene of bravado, determination and tense confrontation as a struggle between capital and labor took place that would change the way industrial America was operated. Control of the two plants was seized by a small band of organizers for the then tiny United Automobile Workers and a portion of the work forces in a sitdown strike that began on Dec. 30, 1936. Instead of walking off their jobs, the workers shut down their machines and stayed in the plant, defying the giant General Motors Corporation to oust them. Although plants in other cities were involved in the effort to gain recognition for the union from G.M., Flint was the manufacturing heart of the company, and the two Fisher Body plants quickly became the focus of the battle. Battles Possible This Year Fisher 1, quiet now for a vacation shutdown, could figure in labor battles in 1987, too. General Motors has said the 65-year-old plant will be permanently closed by next December, displacing the 3,000 people working there. It is a measure of what the union has won for workers that local officials say all but 600 will be eligible for other jobs, retirement or pay until retirement. But the current top leaders of the union say they do not plan to stand idly by as the company closes plants in the United States while making arrangements to import cars and components from overseas. They say job security and the transfer of work to outside suppliers will be among the main issues on the table when negotiations for a new contract start this summer. In 1937 the union's victory in Flint marked a major turning point in labor's effort to organize masses of semiskilled assembly line workers, according to Sidney Fine, a professor of history at the University of Michigan who is the author of a book on the Flint sitdowns. ''There's no question that this is what made the U.A.W. and the C.I.O.,'' he said. ''All the other C.I.O. unions were holding their breath as this little union brought a huge corporation to terms.'' It Is a Company Town Flint, then and now, is a company town and the company is General Motors. It is still the home of the Buick Motor Division, which was the cornerstone on which William C. Durant built the company into what would become the world's largest manufacturing corporation. In the mid-1930's it was estimated that 80 percent of the city's families were dependent in some way on the G.M. payroll. Working conditions in the plants at the time were difficult, by all contemporary accounts, with abusive foremen common and speed-ups in the assembly line's pace frequent. There was widespread unrest among workers, but the company's vast network of spies, its ability to dismiss organizers and its total control of the city's political structure had foiled previous attempts at unionization. ''We were glad somebody was finally getting around to doing something'' when the sitdown started, Howard Washburn, who was a 22-year-old stamping press operator in Fisher 1, recalled recently. ''Thing's were pretty bad in that shop.'' Since walkouts were often ineffective in the Depression, because employers could quickly hire new workers from the ample ranks of the unemployed, the union resorted to sitdowns to interrupt production and put economic pressure on the company to go to the bargaining table. They Were Ahead of the Union The Flint sitdowns seem to have caught both sides by surprise, according to later reports. ''It all happened before the union anticipated it would and before we were fully prepared,'' said Victor Reuther, who was an organizer for the auto workers in Flint at the time. Nevertheless, he said the union feared that General Motors was preparing to break sitdowns at plants in Cleveland and Atlanta and tht the union wanted to strike at the company's core before that could happen. ''We had a feeling they wanted to nip us in the bud,'' he said. Union organizers quickly spread the word that the company was secretly moving key tools out of Fisher 1 to pre-empt a labor action, and the test was on. Mr. Reuther is the only survivor of three brothers who were instrumental in the development of the union. Roy Reuther was heavily involved in the Flint sitdown, but Walter, who would later become a long-term president of the union, was based on the west side of Detroit at the time and had only limited participation. Angered by what executives and civic leaders considered an illegal seizure of company property, General Motors struck back with legal actions, and Flint's establishment used harassment and violence. The city police attacked the workers in Fisher 2 on Jan. 11 with tear gas and bullets in what has become known in union annals as the ''battle of the running bulls.'' The strikers fought back with fire hoses and heavy hinges fired from slingshots made of inner tubes stretched between steel columns. Thirteen strikers and sympathizers were wounded by police bullets that evening, but the workers kept control of the factory. Governor Sends in Guard Alarmed, Gov. Frank Murphy sent in the National Guard. Mr. Washburn said the strikers were alarmed at first by the presence of armed troops. ''We thought they would throw us out,'' he said. But after a short while it became clear that the troops were there mainly to protect the strikers and the numbers of workers staying in the plant gradually dwindled. ''I stayed in all 44 days, but not many did,'' Mr. Washburn said. ''After the first month it became pretty boring.'' Mr. Murphy's action was critical to the outcome, Mr. Fine said. ''The Guard acted as pickets and G.M. had no way to dislodge the workers.'' With its production crippled by the inactivity of the two Fisher plants and the later occupation of a key engine plant, the company gave in Feb. 11 and agreed to recognize the union in some of its plants. The union did not win much else in the way of wages an benefits; Mr. Washburn recalls the the first contract was on one sheet of paper. The current contract book runs to 487 pages. The union leadership is taking a distinctly low-key approach to this critical event in its history. No events marking the start of the strike were held and the union's regional office in Flint will alone handle ceremonies commorating the settlement on Feb. 11, 1987. At least part of the explanation can be found in the gains the union made in subsequent bargaining with General Motors. Union workers are now entitled a continuous vacation from Christmas Eve until the Monday after New Year's Day. The union's offices are closed along with the factories; top officials of both organizations are usually away on vacation.
