307|1987\01\02|DILEMMA FOR SOUTHERN PROSECUTORS: STREETS OR PRISON FOR AIDS CARRIER?|Since he was 15 years old, James Henry McIntyre said, wrapped in an old fur coat as he sat on his dank mattress in the Jackson City Jail, he has enjoyed dressing as a woman and attracting men: married and single men, black and white men, young and old.|Since he was 15 years old, James Henry McIntyre said, wrapped in an old fur coat as he sat on his dank mattress in the Jackson City Jail, he has enjoyed dressing as a woman and attracting men: married and single men, black and white men, young and old. Since he was 15 years old, James Henry McIntyre said, wrapped in an old fur coat as he sat on his dank mattress in the Jackson City Jail, he has enjoyed dressing as a woman and attracting men: married and single men, black and white men, young and old. In the process, he has been arrested more than 60 times, the police here say, on charges associated with street prostitution. In the process, apparently, he also came to harbor the AIDS virus. He tested positive at the County Health Department last March, he said. Still, he put on a skirt and went out at night, and the man the police arrested him with two weeks ago, Mr. McIntyre said, was married, white, gray-haired and overweight. He was a well-known businessman here in the state capital, Police Chief L. C. Smith said, and when the police officer told him that he was with a man, not a woman, and that the man carried the AIDS virus, ''he like to went into shock.'' To Jail or the Street Now, aaccused of ''unnatural intercourse,'' a sodomy charge, Mr. McIntyre, 28, passes his days in an isolated cell while officials of Jackson and Mississippi debate how to resolve the danger they fear he poses. ''The only things we can do with him is hold him, or put him back on the street,'' Chief Smith said. The authorities are also loath to keep him in the all-male environment of jail or prison, for fear of spreading the the AIDS virus there. Conviction on the sodomy charge, a felony, could result in as much as 10 years in prison. But the District Attorney's office, which has to make the decision whether to prosecute, is undecided. ''I don't know what the hell direction we intend to take,'' Assistant District Attorney Tommy Mayfield said. ''We're sort of damned if we do and damned if we don't.'' Mr. Mayfield, shaking his head, said: ''I think anything anybody does is going to be passing the buck. The guy is obviously not going to quit doing what he does. And nobody, either in or out of this office, has come up with a workable plan.'' Quarantine Law Is Cited Looking to state health statutes for help, Mr. Mayfield cited Mississippi's quarantine law. It reads, in short: ''The State Department of Health shall have the authority to investigate and control the causes of epidemic, infectious and other diseases affecting the public health, including the authority to establish, maintain and enforce isolation and quarantine, and in pursuance thereof, to exercise such physical control over property and individuals as the department may find necessary for the protection of the public health.'' Mississippi, with a largely rural and small-town population of 2.5 million, now has 48 people suffering from acquired immune deficiency syndrome, Dr. Ed Thompson, the state epidemiologist, said today. He said that the state's quarantine law wa one of the nation's strongest and that he would use it against Mr. McIntyre if prosecution failed. But Dr. Thompson added that the quarantine process was cumbersome so that it assured protection of civil rights and that it was not intended to regulate adult sexual activity. ''We could proscribe this individual from having sexual activity with other individuals,'' he said, ''but how do you enforce that?'' A Death and a Surrender In Houston earlier this year, Dr. Thompson said, the problem of an infected male prostitute who vowed to continue his trade was resolved when he died of AIDS. In Minneapolis this year a former male prostitute voluntarily identified himself as a carrier of AIDS and the owner of the male escort agency he had worked for agreed to begin giving the police the names of hundreds of former clients so they could be warned. In the case here, Dr. Thompson said that if Mr. McIntyre hadbroken the law he should be prosecuted under it and imprisoned. ''He can be confined so that he doesn't spread it,'' he said. He said the larger problem was one of public awareness. ''Having sex with any prostitute, especially a male prostitute, is taking your life in your hands,'' Dr. Thompson said. Mr. McIntyre, a slight, soft-spoken man, denies committing the act he is charged him with. ''They said I gave him oral sex,'' Mr. McIntyre said. But he does not seem to understand the implications of the virus he carries or the need to avoid sexual contact with others. ''I've been told that I have the AIDS virus, but not AIDS,'' he said. ''But I don't feel like I have anything. I don't feel bad.'' In light of what is known about AIDS, Mr. McIntyre could be expected to carry the virus for the rest of his life, perhaps never getting the disease himself. Mr. McIntyre said quietly: ''There's no way you can get rid of the virus? It just carries on? I always use condoms, so I couldn't transmit the virus, could I?'' A Bus Ticket Out of Town He said he told his jailers in March that he carried the AIDS virus, but that it was a story he made up to to get out of jail. Then the jailers had him tested for the presence of antibodies and the test was posiitive. After that result, he said, some city vice detectives ''very quickly'' took him to the Jackson bus station and bought him a transcontinental bus ticket. ''It was to San Diego,'' the city from which his mother brought him here 10 years or so ago, he said. But two months ago, Mr. McIntyre said, he returned because his mother here was ill. And he returned to the streets, to the satisfaction he finds in skirts and heels and wigs, and men. ''I never thought about it,'' he said softly. ''I just always did it. It was just something that came natural to me to do.'' 'He's Selling Death' Now the natural inclination has become a practical and philosophic problem for heterosexuals and homosexuals alike. ''He's selling death, if you want to put it that way,'' says Eddie Sandifer, executive director of the Mississippi Gay Alliance. Mr. Sandifer and Dr. Thompson agree that Mr. McIntyre is only a tiny part of the enormous medical and ethical problem of AIDS. The sad thing, Mr. Sandifer said, is that what Mr. McIntyre is alleged to have done is not much different from what many homosexual men who know they have tested positive for AIDS are still doing. Frequently, he said, they have their test results sent to the Gay Alliance office rather than to their homes. Sometimes they confide in Mr. Sandifer. ''We know who they are,'' Mr. Sandider said. Yet still, he said, he and other alliance members see ''these people going to the bars and the bookstores every night and picking up tricks.'' ''I don't think that what this guy in jail was doing is any worse than what a lot of other people are doing,'' he said. ''The only difference is that he is getting paid for it.''
