310|1987\01\02|LOAN COST SHIFT TO STUDENTS IS SOUGHT|Education Department officials say President Reagan will propose a major increase in an experimental student loan program in an effort to shift the costs of such loans from the Federal Government to the students.|Education Department officials say President Reagan will propose a major increase in an experimental student loan program in an effort to shift the costs of such loans from the Federal Government to the students. Education Department officials say President Reagan will propose a major increase in an experimental student loan program in an effort to shift the costs of such loans from the Federal Government to the students. That proposal is one of several ways in which groups representing colleges and universities expect the Reagan Administration to try to cut overall student aid in its budget for the fiscal year 1988, which Mr. Reagan will submit to Congress on Monday. Bruce M. Carnes, the Deputy Under Secretary of Education in charge of budget, said the Administration would seek $600 million to expand the pilot program, which does not rely on Federal subsidies. Unlike existing plans, the new program requires students to pay full interest charges but offers more flexible repayment terms. The program was recently established on a pilot basis and financed at $5 million. At a briefing Wednesday, Mr. Carnes outlined hopes for greatly expanding the new program, the Income Contingent Loan plan, but he declined to specify what cuts in student aid the department would be seeking. ''The overall budget will look more like the $15.2 billion we requested for fiscal 1987 than the $19.5 billion level appropriated by Congress,'' Mr. Carnes said of the overall education budget, without going into detail. ''There will be reductions. No one is disputing that.'' 'There Is No Free Lunch' ''Anyone now eligible for student aid will remain eligible for the same amount,'' he added. ''But the terms of getting it may be more onerous for them. There could be more loans than grants and more unsubsidized loans than subsidized. There is no free lunch. Someone has to pay the bill.'' Robert Atwell, president of the American Council on Education, an organization representing all colleges and universities, said he expected the Administration to propose ''massive cuts comparable to what we've seen in the past several years.'' ''The substitution of loans for grants and the resulting increase in student indebtedness ought to concern us as a society,'' he said. ''Before we move any further toward loans, we must examine what we're doing. It's bad public policy to have a major shift in that direction.'' Mr. Atwell noted that Congress had consistently rejected proposals by the Administration for deep cuts in student aid. The Administration's current effort to reduce Federal subsidies for student aid comes in the aftermath of a report on student debt released earlier this week by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. The report warned that student borrowing under Federal programs had nearly tripled in the last 10 years, raising concern that debt would overburden a generation. In the same period, it said, Federal grants and scholarships declined by 62 percent. Education Secretary William J. Bennett, however, has contended that the student loan program must be overhauled and that expensive Federal subsidies should be eliminated. ''Switching the interest burden from the Government to the recipient would make it possible to offer large loans with longer repayment periods,'' he said in a recent speech. ''The college graduate will earn $640,000 more than the high school graduate over his lifetime. It is only sensible and fair that that beneficiary pay the cost, rather than the taxpayer.'' The Income Contingent Loan plan will require just that, by charging students interest from the time they begin to receive their loans, at the Treasury Bill rate plus 3 percent, which would currently amount to about 8.6 percent. It would set no fixed term of repayment but would link repayment to the student's later income with payments not to exceed 15 percent of income. Financial Impact on Students Eligibility would depend on student financial needs, officials say. The program would be more expensive for students and their parents because the Government would not be paying any of the interest charges as it does in other programs. But, according to Mr. Carnes, it would prove helpful to them after graduation by taking their income into account in setting annual payments. The Administration had at first sought $90 million a year for the program, but Congress adopted it in 1986 only on a limited, experimental basis involving $5 million a year for five years. It will enable eligible undergraduates at 10 schools to borrow a maximum of $17,500 over four years. Applications to select the 10 participating schools have not yet been sent out by the department. The proposal in the Administration's budget calls for broadening the plan to 1,500 schools and including graduate students as well as undergraduates. The maximum total loan could run as high as $50,000. Under the proposal, participating schools could offer no new loans under an existing loan plan, the National Direct Student Loan program, which the Administration hopes eventually to eliminate gradually. The direct loan program, which is entirely financed by the Government, benefits the most needy students. The plan charges no interest while students are in school and 5 percent for the 10-year repayment term after graduation. Its loan limit is $9,000. Mr. Carnes said the Administration's budget would again seek no new money for that plan, as it has for several years. But the Administration will not try to eliminate the largest loan plan, the Guaranteed Student Loan program, or change the method of determining eligibility, he said. That program, which entitles eligible undergraduates to borrow a maximum of $17,250 from private lenders under Federal guarantees, requires the student to pay no interest while in school. The borrower's interest rate goes from 8 percent to 10 percent over the 10-year repayment term after graduation. The Government pays the lender interest at the Treasury Bill rate plus 3.25 percent while the student is in school and pays the difference between the student's interest rate and the lender's charge until the loan is repaid. Cost of $3 Billion a Year According to Mr. Carnes, the guaranteed loan program costs the Government $2 billion a year in interest subsidies and $1 billion a year as a result of defaults. He suggested that the Income Contingent Loan program would help reduce defaults that result when the fixed repayment rate under the guaranteed loan program proves too burdensome for recent graduates' incomes. Mr. Atwell of the American Council on Education and Richard Rossner, president of the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities, both said they objected to extending the experimental program before any results of the pilot program could be assessed. ''I don't think we should prejudge the experiment and move to massive increases in something we don't understand very well,'' Mr. Atwell said. And Mr. Rossner said he feared the proposal was aimed at replacing both the direct loan program and the guaranteed loan program with one that would lead to higher debt for students and ''scare many students away from college.'' According to Mr. Carnes, the other proposed increases in the department's budget are a $200 million increase in financing for remedial education for poor children, which would amount to a 5 percent rise, and a $24 million increase in financing for adult education, which would be 23 percent above the current level.
