311|1987\01\02|'63 MURDER FIGURE WINS LEGAL ROUND|Twenty-three years ago Ian Campbell, a Los Angeles police officer, was murdered in an onion field 113 miles from here to which he had been taken by kidnappers. This week Gregory Ulas Powell, who was sentenced to life in prison for the Campbell murder, won a court order that may result in his freedom.|Twenty-three years ago Ian Campbell, a Los Angeles police officer, was murdered in an onion field 113 miles from here to which he had been taken by kidnappers. This week Gregory Ulas Powell, who was sentenced to life in prison for the Campbell murder, won a court order that may result in his freedom. Twenty-three years ago Ian Campbell, a Los Angeles police officer, was murdered in an onion field 113 miles from here to which he had been taken by kidnappers. This week Gregory Ulas Powell, who was sentenced to life in prison for the Campbell murder, won a court order that may result in his freedom. The California Supreme Court ruled that the State Board of Prison Terms erred four years ago by rescinding his scheduled 1983 parole date. Mr. Powell and Jimmy Lee Smith, his co-defendant, were convicted of killing Officer Campbell on March 9, 1963, after disarming him and his partner, Karl Hettinger, in an onion field in Bakersfield. Mr. Hettinger survived. The defendants were sentenced to death, but the verdicts were overturned by the California Supreme Court in 1969. Joseph Wambaugh's novel and subsequent movie, ''The Onion Field,'' were based on the crime and trial. On Monday the Supreme Court voted 4 to 3 in favor of Mr. Powell's contention that the State Board of Prison Terms improperly relied on unproved evidence of sexual misconduct when it rescinded his 1983 parole date. #3 Justices Leaving Office The court, the state's highest, ruled in the final week of office for Chief Justice Rose Bird and Associate Justices Cruz Reynoso and Joseph Grodin, who suffered a resounding defeat in last month's confirmation election and will leave office Sunday. The three were joined by Justice Allen Broussard in voting for freeing Mr. Powell. Mr. Smith was paroled in 1982 but was jailed two years later for a parole violation. He was paroled again last month and is now reported living in the Los Angeles area. The ruling brought immediate criticism from the police and prosecutors. John Van de Kamp, the State Attorney General, said he would press the court to rescind its decision. Mr. Van de Kamp, who as Los Angeles District Attorney personally campaigned to keep Mr. Powell in prison in 1982, said he would file a petition for a rehearing in the case within a week. Reactions Are Bitter ''He doesn't belong on the street,'' said District Attorney Ira Reiner of Los Angeles. ''He belongs where he is right now, and that's behind bars for the rest of his life.'' Police Chief Daryl F. Gates of Los Angeles said he was ''absolutely shocked,'' noting that Mr. Powell had been ''twice sentenced to the gas chamber for the cold-blooded killing of a police officer.'' Officer Campbell's partner, Mr. Hettiner, who is now retired, said of the two defendants: '' They should have been executed. They executed my friend and my partner.'' Deukmejian Filling Court This week Gov. George Deukmejian announced six choices for the Supreme Court. Three of the nominees will fill the vacancies created in the November election. Mr. Van de Kamp has said he hopes one of the replacements could side with the three dissenters in the Powell case to force a rehearing. If the court agrees to rehear the case, Mr. Powell's release will be stayed, but if not he will be freed. The Supreme Court first overturned his death sentence in 1969. After a new trial he was sentenced to death again, but that sentence was overturned in 1972 and his sentence was reduced to life in prison. That meant he was eligible for parole. Dennis Riordan, Mr. Powell's attorney, had appealed the board's decision to a Superior Court judge who found the board had overstepped its authority. The Supreme Court's action affirmed the Superior Court order.
