312|1987\01\02|Boesky and Levine Snared in Inquiry|In the wake of the largest insider trading scandal ever, Wall Street professionals start the new year wondering who will be the next to fall. Already, Ivan F. Boesky and Dennis B. Levine, two highly successful and flamboyant speculators, were toppled by an investigation that revealed they had reaped tens of millions in profits by trading on privileged information.|In the wake of the largest insider trading scandal ever, Wall Street professionals start the new year wondering who will be the next to fall. Already, Ivan F. Boesky and Dennis B. Levine, two highly successful and flamboyant speculators, were toppled by an investigation that revealed they had reaped tens of millions in profits by trading on privileged information. In the wake of the largest insider trading scandal ever, Wall Street professionals start the new year wondering who will be the next to fall. Already, Ivan F. Boesky and Dennis B. Levine, two highly successful and flamboyant speculators, were toppled by an investigation that revealed they had reaped tens of millions in profits by trading on privileged information. In addition, five others pleaded guilty to crimes in connection with a loose network that swapped confidential information about mergers, takeovers and corporate restructurings to beat the market in executing trades. The scheme began to unravel in May 1985, when an anonymous letter was sent from Caracas, Venezuela, to the New York headquarters of Merrill Lynch & Company. It alleged that two of the firm's salesmen had engaged in insider trading. The letter triggered an investigation that led eventually to Mr. Levine, the investment banker at the center of the insider ring. According to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Levine used confidential information about transactions involving dozens of companies in trades that reaped profits of more than $12 million on an original investment of $170,000. Mr. Levine, 34 years old, pleaded guilty in June to four felony counts. He surrendered more than $11 million in assets, but was allowed to keep his luxury apartment on Park Avenue. Facing a possible prison term of up to 20 years, he agreed to cooperate with authorities while awaiting sentencing. He implicated Mr. Boesky, 49, who agreed to plead guilty to one criminal count and pay $100 million in restitution and fines - by far the largest penalty ever imposed for insider trading. The S.E.C. has alleged that Mr. Levine supplied Mr. Boesky with tips that resulted in profits for Mr. Boesky of more than $50 million. Mr. Boesky's personal wealth was estimated at more than $200 million. But critics of the S.E.C. have charged that after his illegal dealings were detected, Mr. Boesky made much more money on inside information of a different type. Because it was expected that a public announcement of the scandal would send the market into disarray, Mr. Boesky was permitted to continue to trade - and to pay off $1.4 billion worth of debt largely through the sale of equities. The S.E.C. maintained that it allowed Mr. Boesky to continue his trading to avert a market panic. BUSINESS PEOPLE: 1986'S NEWSMAKERS IN FINANCE
