313|1987\01\02|Oil Price Backlash Tripped Yamani|Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani was there when OPEC oil prices quadrupled, and he was there when they plummeted, but Sheik Yamani is not there anymore. His ouster in October as Saudi Arabia's oil minister resulted in a new strategy by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and could bring higher prices and broader changes to the world oil industry.|Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani was there when OPEC oil prices quadrupled, and he was there when they plummeted, but Sheik Yamani is not there anymore. His ouster in October as Saudi Arabia's oil minister resulted in a new strategy by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and could bring higher prices and broader changes to the world oil industry. Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani was there when OPEC oil prices quadrupled, and he was there when they plummeted, but Sheik Yamani is not there anymore. His ouster in October as Saudi Arabia's oil minister resulted in a new strategy by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and could bring higher prices and broader changes to the world oil industry. Sheik Yamani was the most prominent and influential official in the world of Arab oil. Although he was instrumental in quadrupling OPEC's prices in the 1970's, he had been a moderating force in recent years. He had, for instance, engineered OPEC's policy of unrestrained production - which forced oil prices down - in an attempt to win a bigger share of the market. The price decline led to his undoing. The Saudi royal family, under pressure from Iran, replaced him with Hisham Nazer, who has encouraged a closer relationship between the two countries. Now OPEC, aiming for an average price of $18 a barrel, has embarked on production cuts. Analysts, however, are skeptical that the target price can be maintained. Sheik Yamani, 56 years old, had been the oil minister since 1962. Whatever his successes, he was always eloquent and colorful. As befitting a sheik, he dressed well and owned homes in Europe. Now Sheik Yamani is traveling with less fanfare. He showed up in Hong Kong in mid-December under an assumed name; he was said to be there for acupuncture treatments for an undisclosed ailment. BUSINESS PEOPLE: 1986'S NEWSMAKERS IN FINANCE
