314|1987\01\02|Tenacious Packwood Saved Tax Bill|Political experts said the tax bill would die, but it was massaged back to life this year. A hero of the emergency operation was a Republican Senator from Oregon, Bob Packwood, the 54-year-old chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.|Political experts said the tax bill would die, but it was massaged back to life this year. A hero of the emergency operation was a Republican Senator from Oregon, Bob Packwood, the 54-year-old chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. Political experts said the tax bill would die, but it was massaged back to life this year. A hero of the emergency operation was a Republican Senator from Oregon, Bob Packwood, the 54-year-old chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 will drastically alter how Americans pay their taxes, and much of the credit for its passage belongs to Mr. Packwood, a 19-year Senate veteran. A moderate who has often been at odds with the White House - he was removed as chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee in 1982 after publicly criticizing President Reagan - Mr. Packwood became one of Mr. Reagan's staunchest allies on taxes. Getting the bill through committee hearings meant dodging hundreds of lobbyists - Mr. Packwood once called them ''assassins'' - who dogged his path for two months. It also meant dealing with bickering Senators on the committee. When it looked as if the bill would be killed by special interests, Mr. Packwood ordered members behind closed doors. The panel finally voted 20-0 for the measure and gave the chairman a standing ovation. Another obstacle lay in ironing out differences between the Senate and House versions. Mr. Packwood and his House counterpart, Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who is chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, wrestled out a compromise. While the rest of Congress was on vacation, they presented the bill to the conferees, who adopted it. It passed the full House and Senate, and the President signed it into law Oct. 22. The tax battle over, Mr. Packwood won re-election in November, but lost his chairmanship when Senate control went to the Democrats. He begins the new term, his fourth, as the committee's ranking minority member. BUSINESS PEOPLE: 1986'S NEWSMAKERS IN FINANCE
