315|1987\01\02|49ERS PRACTICE TO A NOISY BEAT|When practice started today, so did the music.|When practice started today, so did the music. When practice started today, so did the music. The first song was ''New York State of Mind'' by Billy Joel, which was fairly appropriate in that the San Francisco 49ers were practicing for a playoff game Sunday against the Giants in Giants Stadium. Then they heard ''We Are the Champions'' by Queen, ''Hip to Be Square'' by Huey Lewis and the News, ''How Will I Know?'' by Whitney Houston, ''Soldier of Misfortune'' by Jackson Browne, ''Open Your Heart'' by Madonna, ''Billie Jean'' by Michael Jackson and a few others. From two large speakers perched above the practice field on a terrace outside of the coaches' offices, the music was always loud, and louder still when the 49ers were running their offensive plays. At times, Coach Bill Walsh had to cup his hands around his mouth and scream directions. But the idea was to simulate the noise and distractions that sometimes confront the visiting team. Clamor at the End Zones ''A lot of players have a hard time hearing, close near the end zones,'' Joe Montana said later. ''We have to get used to it.'' For some of them, the musical dimension was little more than a carryover from the night before, New Year's Eve, when they had attended a concert in the Oakland Coliseum featuring Huey Lewis and the News, a Bay Area band that burst into national prominence several years ago. Often, Huey and the News sing the national anthem before 49er home games and perform their own work at halftime. Huey has became friends with many of the 49ers and such good friends with four of them - Montana, Dwight Clark, Ronnie Lott and Riki Ellison - that he invited them to join the group as backup singers for two songs on their latest album, ''Hip to Be Square'' and ''I Know What I Like.'' Not that all of them are necessarily great singers. ''Dwight's the singer,'' said Montana. ''I think they turned my mike off.'' ''It must have taken us 1,000 takes to get it right,'' said Ellison, an inside linebacker. ''We had to do it until they liked it. Dwight's the singer. Joe's shy. I was just yelling.'' By Wednesday night somebody apparently thought they were ready for their concert debut. For the same two numbers they had recorded in the studio, Montana, Clark, Lott and Ellison joined the group on stage, singing their lines and dancing in unison as backup groups are supposed to do. Of course, that's not exactly the way it came out, even after they had spent about an hour trying to learn their steps. 'A Bull in a China Shop' ''We didn't know what we were doing,'' Montana said. ''Riki was like a bull in a china shop.'' By practice today, any damage inflicted by Ellison was negligible, at most. Montana ran the offense with typical aplomb; the defense seemed to know how to react properly when the 49ers were simulating the Giants' offense. The music aside, the practice was still serious, for this is no trivial matter. The Giants beat the 49ers the last two times they played, 17-3 in the National Conference wild-card game last season and 21-17 five weeks ago in Candlestick Park. The most recent loss was especially disconcerting in that the 49ers played a near-perfect first half to lead by 17-0 and achieved what they intended on defense, stopping Joe Morris. But an 11-minute stretch in the third quarter cost them three touchdowns, and they never recovered. Even now, despite gaining just 14 yards on 13 carries in the last game, Morris remains the defense's biggest worry. ''He's one of the hardest guys in the league to tackle,'' said Ellison. Ellison doesn't imagine the Giants will do much different this time. They built a 14-2 season on Morris's running, 1,516 yards worth, and timely passing by Phil Simms. ''So why would they change now?'' he said. Giants' Offense Respected ''They have a good running game,'' Ellison said. ''But I'm sure they will try to keep us off-balance by mixing it up. That's why they're different than a team like the Rams. If you can stop Dickerson, you can win the game. With the Giants, you can't. They have a lot better passing game, better offensive linemen and a better defense.'' As for singers, well, that's another story. ''I wouldn't mind catching them on their next tour,'' Ellison said of Huey and the group. ''I traveled to Arizona with them once two years ago. They let me come on stage and beat up a couple of a drums.''  N.F.L. PLAYOFFS
