317|1987\01\02|TECHNOLOGY SEEN AS TOP SECTOR|Technology companies are likely to outperform the rest of American manufacturing in 1987, the Government predicted in an annual forecast. But as in the past, it said that service industries should do much better than manufacturing.|Technology companies are likely to outperform the rest of American manufacturing in 1987, the Government predicted in an annual forecast. But as in the past, it said that service industries should do much better than manufacturing. Technology companies are likely to outperform the rest of American manufacturing in 1987, the Government predicted in an annual forecast. But as in the past, it said that service industries should do much better than manufacturing. The Commerce Department projected an overall increase in shipments by manufacturing industries of 2 percent in 1987. That is about the same as the increase expected for 1986. In all, the department predicted that 70 percent of manufacturing industries would see their shipments rise in 1987, the second-highest such figure since 1978. 'A Good Year' ''Over all, 1987 should be a good year - by and large as good a year as 1986,'' Deputy Secretary Clarence Brown said when he released the 690-page United States Industrial Outlook on Wednesday. ''The growth will be broader across all industries than in recent years although somewhat shallower for all,'' Mr. Brown said. Shipments of manufactured goods last declined during the recession year of 1982, when they fell 4.5 percent. Mr. Brown said the gap between the fastest-growing industries and the slowest performers is expected to narrow to the smallest spread in 15 years. The gap in growth rates was 29 percent in 1983 but is expected to be only 9 percent in 1987 between the manufacturing industries in the top 10 percent of growth and those in the bottom 10 percent. Broader Participation Seen ''A broader range of industries will participate in the overall moderate growth,'' Mr. Brown said. The department said the semiconductor industry would enjoy the fastest growth in manufacturing, an expected 26.5 percent rise in shipments. At the other end of the spectrum, shipments of turbine generators are projected to decline by 62.4 percent this year. In the services category, mutual funds are expected to top the list, with a growth in assets of 28 percent. The estimates are based on an economic forecast that calls for the nation's trade deficit to shrink by between $30 billion and $40 billion next year, providing relief for American manufacturers that have lost ground to imports. Following semiconductors, the top manufacturing growth industries in 1987 should be in electronic capacitors, with an 11.5 percent increase in shipments, and optical devices and lenses, with an 11 percent projected growth rate. Manufacturers of X-ray devices are expected to see growth in shipments of 10.9 percent, while producers of electrical measuring devices will see 10 percent growth. Others in Top 10 Other companies in the top 10 were manufacturers of automotive stampings, with projected growth of 9.4 percent; surgical appliances, 8.8 percent; adhesives and sealants, 8.3 percent; particle board, 8.2 percent, and missiles and space vehicles, with a rise of 8 percent. In the services category, mutual funds will be followed by management, consulting and public relations firms, with an expected 18 percent rise in revenues. Property and casualty insurance companies will be next with a 14 percent rise, followed by a 12.8 percent increase in revenues of data processing companies. Next on the services list were life insurance, savings and loan associations and medical service providers, all with expected increases of 10 percent; franchise sales operations, with an 8.6 percent increase; advertising, up 7.8 percent, and commercial banking, up 7 percent in asset growth. In addition to the big decline expected for turbine makers, other manufacturing companies in the expected bottom 10 of performers for 1987 are metal-cutting machines, with an expected decline in shipments of 13.2 percent, followed by paperboard mills, structural metal fabricators, special die and tool makers, and manufacturers of photoengraving equipment, car bodies, games and toys, metal-forming machines and shoes, all with declines in shipments of 6 percent or more.
