318|1987\01\02|A Busy Year for Bankers, Regulators|In banking and finance, 1986 brought changes that will not end with the turning of the calendar. As more states ease their banking laws, more banks are crossing state lines, a trend that is expected to grow this year. And even as the Reagan Administration continues its relaxed posture on business regulation, the regulators themselves are making news.|In banking and finance, 1986 brought changes that will not end with the turning of the calendar. As more states ease their banking laws, more banks are crossing state lines, a trend that is expected to grow this year. And even as the Reagan Administration continues its relaxed posture on business regulation, the regulators themselves are making news. In banking and finance, 1986 brought changes that will not end with the turning of the calendar. As more states ease their banking laws, more banks are crossing state lines, a trend that is expected to grow this year. And even as the Reagan Administration continues its relaxed posture on business regulation, the regulators themselves are making news. Among last year's newsmakers in finance was Walter V. Shipley, chairman of the Chemical New York Corporation, who took a $1.1 billion gamble on buying a bank in the heart of the depressed oil and real estate markets of Texas. Chemical plans to buy the Houston-based Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc., whose chairman, Ben Love, has been seeking a new source of funding. Meanwhile, Gerald W. Fronterhouse, chairman of the Republicbank Corporation, had expressed similar faith in Texas's long-range health. Republic plans to buy its weaker Dallas rival, the Interfirst Corporation, headed by Robert H. Stewart 3d. Regulators came to the fore nearly as much as those they regulated. Gary Lynch, director of enforcement at the Securities and Exchange Commission, sent chills through Wall Street with his attack on insider trading. His boss, John S. R. Shad, the chairman of the S.E.C., used the scandals to bolster his plea for more funding for the enforcement agency. At the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, L. William Seidman battled the growing problem of bank failures with ways to make it easier for healthy banks to acquire failing ones. And at the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the chairman, Edwin J. Gray, had another kind of problem. He apologized to Congress for allowing some of his personal expenses to be picked up by the thrift-industry institutions his agency regulates. Robert E. Brennan of First Jersey Securities, who has been fighting Federal fraud charges, decided to sell the firm's retail branch system to the Sherwood Capital Group. Frederic W. Rittereiser, First Jersey's chairman, planned to join Sherwood. Mr. Rittereiser's brother, Robert P. Rittereiser, took on the added title of chief executive at E. F. Hutton and proceeded to cut costs and employees to help the firm's performance. The Japanese pressed their attention on Wall Street. John L. Weinberg, chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Company, sold a 12.5 percent interest in the firm to the Sumitomo Bank. And Peter Rona, chief executive of the J. Henry Schroder Bank, agreed to buy Aubrey G. Lanston & Company, a big American bond company. The Japanese connection is that Schroder is a unit of the Industrial Bank of Japan. Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d continued United States efforts to revive the world economy by trying to pursuade Japan and West Germany to adopt growth policies. Overseas, Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman of the London Stock Exchange, had his hands full as the ''Big Bang'' ushered in a deregulated and more competitive era. Meanwhile, in Brazil, President Jose Sarney provoked antigovernment demonstrations as he lifted popular price freezes that had triggered a flurry of consumer spending. A ROUNDUP OF OTHER HEADLINERS IN FINANCE
