319|1987\01\02|THE FUTURE IS NOW FOR FIESTA COMMITTEE|College football fans are interested in Friday night's Fiesta Bowl between Penn State and Miami because it will decide which team will finish No. 1 in the country this season. The game, however, will serve another purpose as well. It is an experiment, an opportunity to test the concept of a football playoff to determine a true national champion, rather than one chosen by a panel of sports reporters and coaches in the news-agency polls.|College football fans are interested in Friday night's Fiesta Bowl between Penn State and Miami because it will decide which team will finish No. 1 in the country this season. The game, however, will serve another purpose as well. It is an experiment, an opportunity to test the concept of a football playoff to determine a true national champion, rather than one chosen by a panel of sports reporters and coaches in the news-agency polls. College football fans are interested in Friday night's Fiesta Bowl between Penn State and Miami because it will decide which team will finish No. 1 in the country this season. The game, however, will serve another purpose as well. It is an experiment, an opportunity to test the concept of a football playoff to determine a true national champion, rather than one chosen by a panel of sports reporters and coaches in the news-agency polls. A playoff would be popular with the fans and television networks. Some college administrators and coaches, Joe Paterno of Penn State, most notably, favor it, too. Others, for example, Jimmy Johnson, the Miami coach, oppose a playoff for various reasons. ''The Fiesta Bowl is not really a bowl game for us,'' Johnson said. ''There is no way we can enjoy the festivities like a regular bowl game. The pressure has made this a difficult situation.'' Weighing the Burden Even Paterno said he is monitoring this week's events to determine whether a national championship game is worth the added burden it places on the respective coaching staffs and players. ''This is the closest we've come to a game like that,'' he said. ''Maybe, it is too big. Maybe, it's not worth it. But I think it can be a fun situation, a once in a lifetime thing.'' The Fiesta Bowl committee is proceeding under the assumption the game will receive rave notices all around. Don Meyers, a local attorney and chairman of the team selection committee, said that sometime before next April he would formally request the Post-Season Committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association to amend its bylaws to allow a team more than one post-season football game. The plan, Meyers said, was for the Fiesta Bowl to be held on or about Jan. 15 next year, two weeks after the New Year's Day bowl games. The two teams would be selected from among the winners of those games. ''I think this will go a long way toward determining a national championship, to meet the objectives of the fans,'' he said. Problems With Playoff Meyers does not think there is enough support among college administrators and coaches for a post-season playoff. Football seasons are considered to be too long already. And a playoff would necessitate a small post-season tournament field with teams chosen arbitrarily, perhaps using the news-agency rankings as a reference point. Ultimately, good teams, even conference winners, would be excluded. There is also a reluctance to upset the traditional New Year's bowl games, which have been a lucrative reward for the schools, as well as a means of determining the final rankings. In order to gain the support of those bowls - the Rose, Sugar, Cotton and Orange - for his plan, Meyers is proposing that a rotation system be implemented so that each of those bowls would take turns serving as host for the so-called national championship game in mid-January. ''We could have a representative of each bowl, one from the N.C.A.A., and perhaps a representative from each of the wire services, choose the two teams that would be invited to the game,'' Meyers said. ''We would pay each team $2.5 million, give $3 million to the N.C.A.A. and still have enough left over to cover costs.'' Because it does not have a contractual agreement with any conference, the Fiesta Bowl was able to raise the ante and lure No. 1 Miami and No. 2 Penn State - independent teams -to Tempe, Ariz., this year. The Fiesta Bowl is a relative newcomer - this is the 16th game - but it has risen quickly in prestige because of its Sunbelt setting and financial clout. Backed by Sunkist, the Fiesta Bowl, which paid Arizona State and Florida State $168,237 in the inaugural game in 1971, is rewarding Miami and Penn State with $2.4 million each this year. The game was moved to New Year's Day in 1982. To take advantage of this year's matchup for No. 1, the Fiesta Bowl was moved to Jan. 2 and given a prime-time kickoff in the East by NBC. ''We think we've been right on merit on all the moves we've made,'' Meyers said. ''From the start, our goal has been to do something innovative. We feel this is what the N.C.A.A. should be doing. We're urging them to get into the 20th century. But if they remain as inflexible as they have in the past, then our plan will not be approved.''
