326|1987\01\02|TRANSCRIPT OF CUOMO'S INAUGURAL ADDRESS FOR HIS SECOND TERM|Following is a transcript of Governor Cuomo's inaugural address yesterday in Albany as recorded by The New York Times:|Following is a transcript of Governor Cuomo's inaugural address yesterday in Albany as recorded by The New York Times: Following is a transcript of Governor Cuomo's inaugural address yesterday in Albany as recorded by The New York Times: Thank you, Chief Judge Sol Wachtler. Congratulations to my colleagues Stan and Ned and Bob. I feel many things at this moment. Most of all, I think, I feel gratitude to Matilda, my partner, my friend and my wife, to all of our children, to our family, especially our parents. I feel gratitude to all of you here whose faces I recognize so well, who have supported us and encouraged us. Especially those of you who were with us in the very early days when my obvious limitations and imperfections made it so unlikely that I would ever succeed in public life. I feel gratitude to the hard-working men and women on my staff and in my cabinet and in all of the agencies of state government, and in the Legislature, because it was all of them who, working together in the past four years, created a record of achievement that helped earn us what is, I think it's fair to say, an extraordinary electoral victory. I feel especially grateful to a wonderful public servant who we're going to miss a great deal, Stanley Fink, who came into government to make life better for the people he served and in his extraordinary career, he elevated the politics of New York. We will miss him, Stanley Fink. I'm grateful to a kind providence that bestows blessings with a generosity that goes far beyond anything we could earn. And in a very special way, I feel gratitude to the Empire State and to this amazing place of miracles called America. Miracle is, I think, not too grand a word for the magnificent idea of democracy and its blueprint, the United States Constitution, whose 200th birthday we'll be celebrating this year. Circle of Opportunity Opening Ever Wider We began with 13 diverse and often quarrelsome colonies, native peoples with their own separate and powerful cultures, a vast land, most of it wilderness. And from these things we created a country that now reaches from ocean to great ocean and beyond, the freest, the most powerful nation in the entire world. For 200 years this nation has met challenge after challenge. For 200 years it has grown and prospered, realizing more and more of the daring promises of the Declaration of Independence, whose promise is embodied by our Statue of Liberty. Opening ever wider the circle of opportunity, first to the colonists, then to the pioneers and then to the immigrants from all over the world. No, miracle is not too grand a word for America's success in providing sustenance and opportunity for the people of 10 generations, many of whom, were it not for this place, would have lived whole lives without any hope at all. And my administration has been built on that belief, that the miracle is not over, built on the belief that New York is still a place of hope and opportunity for those who are willing to join the unique American experiment in democracy. Now I talked about that belief four years ago when I stood on this platform for the first time. I talked about progressive pragmatism and the idea of family. I talked about the dangers of Social Darwinism, about Rabbi Hillel and Pope John XXIII and Mama and Papa and Ellis Island. I said then all of the things that were on my mind and in my heart. And some approved of the words that I used but said that four years of actual governance would show them to be unrealistic, perhaps just poetry. Improving Lives In Tangible Ways But now, four years later, having applied those ideas to the task of serving this wonderful state of nearly 18 million people, I believe it all, even more assuredly and passionately than I did then. For nearly 1,500 days, we struggled to make our inaugural rhetoric everyday reality. And now we can look back and see how our beliefs have worked to improve the lives of the people of this state in tangible ways. In 1983, we promised jobs. Now over 900,000 more New Yorkers are at work. In 1983, we reminded people that part of what makes this miracle work is our reverence for the rule of law, which gives us the order and stability that in parts of this world are imposed with tanks and bayonets and secret police. And since then we have restored and strengthened every part of our criminal-justice system. In 1983, we committed ourselves in a special way to the middle class and the working people of this state - those people who were struggling to pay their taxes, meet their mortgage or their rent payments, educate their children. We've kept that commitment. We enacted the largest tax cut in our history, removed from the rolls altogether 500,000 New Yorkers who work but are still poor. We provided thousands of hard-working families, families not poor enough to be on welfare, but not rich enough to be worry-free, we provided them with an opportunity they would not have had without this government's help, the chance to own their own homes. We made massive new investments in the public schools that have given opportunities to our children for nearly 200 years. And still, we balanced our budget more rigorously than ever before. And in the process, we did not forget the most vulnerable of us. A Government With Heart and Head I said four years ago from this platform that a society as blessed as this one should be able to find room for all at the table: shelter for the homeless, care for the elderly and infirm and hope for the destitute. And those words became laws. We adopted strong nutrition programs and the most ambitious program for the homeless in the United States. We helped relieve the burdens of families who were caring for retarded children. We increased shelter allowances and gave new opportunities for work to New Yorkers who were on welfare. I could go on with this list of accomplishment, but this list is no personal boast. These are not my achievements. They were produced by a government led by Democrats and Republicans, by upstaters and downstaters, by men and women, by blacks and whites from every part of this state. People of every color, people of every creed, representing all of us together. And we proved - together - that the New York idea works, that government can have both a heart and a head, that it can have both common sense and compassion. We proved that we can balance our books without ignoring the reasonable needs of the struggling middle class and poor. Most of all, I think, by our performance we made one point over and over again. We have shown that we are at our very best as a people when we recognize one single basic truth, and it is not always easy to live with. And the truth is that we are all of us connected one to another. We are all of us truly brothers and sisters in one family. That no man is an island, that no woman, no neighborhood, no village, no state, no nation either. That we touch one another, that we need one another. And so we should work together and hope together and love together for the good of all of us. That's the essence of the New York idea. Still Much More To Do in State Now I believe it is right and good to remind ourselves of our achievements at this moment, if only to remind ourselves what we are capable of as a society if we do indeed work together. And we need to be reminded because it would be wrong to let this moment's rejoicing obscure the fact that we still have much to do in this state. We have more people at work than ever before, but still too many of our people are denied the chance to earn their own bread. There are single parents desperate for the day care that will allow them to work in order to provide for their families. There are families and individuals who live in dread of a hospital bill that will deny them the little security they've managed to put aside with a whole lifetime's sweat. There are families anguished by their inability to take care of aging loved ones who are no longer able to take care of themselves. And there appear to be more homeless than ever before, despite all of our efforts. There are thousands of children having children. Thousands more ravished by drugs. Some so desperate that they take their own lives. Faced with these hard facts, we as a people have a number of choices. Those of us who are comfortable can choose to pretend that the problems do not exist. We can look around at the unemployed steelworkers and the other thousands denied the chance to work. At the hard-pressed middle class. Daring to Be Bolder and Wiser We can look at the homeless huddled in doorways, at children barely in their teens who turn to drugs or parenthood as an antidote to despair. We can see more and more elderly living in fear of destitution and abandonment. We can hear the eloquent cries of America's religious leaders, including the Catholic bishops most recently, on behalf of the voiceless poor. And we can dismiss it all on the assumption that the price of comfort for most of us is that government must ignore the rest of us. Or we can say, as we're being urged to by some in Washington, that we have stretched our minds and our wills and our resources as far as they will go. That for all government has tried to do over the last several decades we have only been losing ground, that we now have to settle for less than we once believed we were capable of, less than was done by our forebears who lifted an entire generation from poverty, defeated Fascism and built this country into the strongest nation in the world. And we have another choice. We can aim higher. We can try to do more with this wonderful opportunity. We can dare to be bolder and wiser. We can recall that since Franklin Roosevelt lifted himself from his wheelchair to lift this nation from its knees, until just a few years ago, America found the strength and the intelligence to help millions of people rise from poverty to the middle class and far beyond. Your grandparents, perhaps your parents, certainly mine. And in a more modest way we can be encouraged by our own last four years of progress together, all of us working together. Producing a record of balanced budgets without forgetting that the first purpose of government in New York is to improve the conditions of people's lives. The Future Is Not Beyond Our Control Ladies and gentlemen, I do not believe that our future is beyond our control. I do not believe that this great state, or this great land, has been exhausted in the process of helping earlier generations or that we must resign ourselves to a future of lower expectations. I do not believe that the miracle is over and that the circle of opportunity has closed. Now, make no mistake about it -the path I would suggest is a hard one, actually the hardest. It would be easier to surrender to lower expectations or to give in to the temptation of reckless expenditure as others have. Both of those paths are relatively easy to take. Making the miracle work requires our greatest skill and courage. It requires that we continue the economic resurgence that provides our state with the wealth we need to prepare for our future and to cope with our present. And to do that we must contain our expenditures and the taxes that support those expenditures. We'll have to have the intelligence to continue to avoid the kind of foolish mismanagement of resources and profligate spending that has left the Federal Government with a punishing $200 billion budget deficit and debtor status in the world of international trade. Here in New York, to pursue the path I suggest, we'll have to have the will to say no to some of the things we want so that we will have the capacity to say yes to the things we really need. And all the time that we do these things we must keep in mind that nicely balanced budgets which ignore the need to educate our children or to care for the mentally ill or to keep strong our criminal-justice system would be the emblem of failure and hypocrisy. Immense Satisfaction And Encouragement Now this is a hard challenge indeed. Doing it all at the same time with balance and fairness will require the very best of all of us. And we'll not do it perfectly in any event. There will be failures. There will be disappointments along the way. But in the four years that ended yesterday, we proved that working together over time we can meet that challenge. And that should be a matter, I think, of immense satisfaction for us and great encouragement. It certainly is to me. I am not afraid of the days ahead. I believe, from what I have seen and learned about this state and its people and its governance, that we're strong enough and wise enough to reach higher ground than ever before. And I believe that we will. I see our economy growing, not shrinking. Spurred by lower taxes and our state's vast capacity for high technology, improved by fiber optics in ways that will link our computers and our communications systems and our businesses, our growth assisted by the new opportunity zones, new forms of collaboration between management and labor, new forms of worker participation, billions of dollars in pension funds to be used for capital. I see more jobs. Good jobs for all the people who can work. I see less need for welfare in our future. I see a future where our children - the children of this state - and our young people will get a better start in life than anywhere on this planet. I see our air and water cleaner and safer, our natural beauty preserved with the help of the Superfund and the bond issue we were fortunate enough to have passed last year. I see a new emphasis on the basic values that over the years made sweet and strong the soul of the American people at their very best. Values like honesty, courage, responsibility, dignity, a concern for one another, tolerance and understanding and love and, yes, a sense of family. I see leaders of all political persuasions who have the wisdom and courage to compromise when compromise is in order, and the strength to stand up when principle demands it. I see a new era of accountability ushering in a new era of opportunity. I see a future with all the government we need, but only the government we need. A Vision as Real As the Statue of Liberty I saw it four years ago. And today, as I've said, I see it even more clearly. Together, you and I and all of us in New York have the ability to make the Constitution's third century -and Lady Liberty's second - our greatest ever, with a better, freer, more prosperous, more just society. Now that vision is as real to me as the sight of Liberty Island and our magnificent Lady Liberty. And that fight has been real to me for half a century. I remember it from my childhood in South Jamaica, Queens. I remember having visited the statue and I remember, later, on hot afternoons after supper my friends and I would go up to the tar roofs of the tenements and the apartments where we lived on 150th Street. And we'd stand on the tar roof, still hot from the summer sun, lean against the low walls and look west toward the horizon and the faraway towers of Manhattan. And if we turned our eyes just a little toward the great harbor, we could imagine Lady Liberty holding up her lamp like an evening star. New York State, a place of miracles; the Lady Liberty, beckoning us to opportunity. Together, New York and the Lady allowed us to dream all that might be. Even now, if I try, I can remember. I can see the torch, the star in the distance. I can feel the aching to belong. I can see my father, again weary from another long day's labor, his arms folded, his shirt stained with sweat, watching us as we looked out to where the Lady stood. His tired, hopeful eyes telling us, go on, make your wish. Offering his silent prayer for his children. I can bring it all back. A Lamp Lifted For the Millions And then I have my own silent plea. Lift your lamp, Lady. Lift it to those you've always welcomed. To the lonely and the friendless, to all the members of the human family the world so often finds it convenient to ignore, to despise, even to persecute. Lift it for our brothers and sisters in this country, for the farm families and factory workers who are fighting to hold on to their farms and their jobs and their dignity. For the parents struggling to give their children more than they had - more education, more opportunity, more hope. For the children, the children especially. The children everywhere who are lost and confused, adrift, without values, without guidance. Lift your lamp, Lady, for the millions among us who are without work or enough to eat or even a roof overhead. And lift your lamp, as well, for the fortunate among us. For the well fed, for the well educated, for the satisfied. Don't let us forget who we are and where we came from and what your promise has pledged us to. Remind us always, as you lift your lamp beside the golden door. Make us remember the beauty, the wonder of this place of miracles made for sharing. Write it in our hearts, Lady. No, ladies and gentlemen, the miracle is not over.
