327|1987\01\02|AFGHANISTAN TO OBSERVE A CEASE-FIRE|Afghanistan's Soviet-backed Government announced today that starting Jan. 15 its forces would observe a cease-fire in their battle with Moslem guerrillas.|Afghanistan's Soviet-backed Government announced today that starting Jan. 15 its forces would observe a cease-fire in their battle with Moslem guerrillas. Afghanistan's Soviet-backed Government announced today that starting Jan. 15 its forces would observe a cease-fire in their battle with Moslem guerrillas. Najibullah, the Afghan leader, described the move as a step toward national reconciliation in the seven-year-old war, the Kabul radio reported. But the first reaction from guerrilla leaders appeared to be negative. According to Reuters, a spokesman in Islamabad, Pakistan, for the seven guerrilla groups known as the Mujahedeen said they had rejected Mr. Najibullah's move. According to reports today by the Kabul radio and the Soviet press agency Tass, Mr. Najibullah disclosed the cease-fire on Tuesday in a speech to the Central Committee of the ruling Communist Party of Afghanistan. He was reported to have said the cease-fire would be temporary but could be extended if rebel groups honored it and reconciliation began. Warns Against Attacks ''National reconciliation begins with a cease-fire,'' the radio quoted Mr. Najibullah as having said. ''At the national level, the cease-fire will be effective from Jan. 15.'' He warned, however, that ''if someone continues to fire, he will get the response that will be satisfactory.'' The cease-fire would be followed, he said, by a discussion with the opposition groups, including exiled leaders of the former monarchy. ''We don't want to exclude different political groups, moderates, monarchists and heads of armed anti-Government bands active abroad, from national reconciliation,'' Mr. Najibullah said. ''I have spoken before about the creation of a coalition government of national unity.'' No further details on the cease-fire were provided by the Kabul radio or by the Tass report. The Kabul broadcast was monitored by United States Government listening posts, translated and transmitted to Washington. State Department Doubtful State Department officials said that as far as they knew, the announcement had not been preceded by any discussions between the Afghan Government and the guerrilla groups. Because of this, they said they doubted the cease-fire would win guerrilla backing. There was no official comment in Washington pending the return of senior officials from the New Year's holiday. The analysts said the cease-fire was consistent with the Soviet effort over the last year to widen the political base of the Afghan leadership and to put the onus on the guerrillas for the continued fighting. About 120,000 Soviet troops are stationed in Afghanistan. In December 1985, Pravda, the Soviet Communist Party newspaper, called for including genuine opposition figures in a national reconciliation government. This theme has been repeated by Soviet and Afghan spokesmen since then. In addition, the Soviet side has given signs of being concerned about the negative effect of the drawn-out guerrilla war on its own population and on Soviet standing in Moslem countries. A token withdrawal of about 8,000 troops was undertaken last October and was given wide publicity in the Soviet Union to suggest that Moscow was eager to end its involvement once the proper conditions were met. Took Over in May Mr. Najibullah, a former secret police chief, took over control in May after the Soviet Union forced Babrak Karmal to step down as party leader. He has repeatedly called for a reconciliation government. In November Mr. Karmal was forced to give up his remaining Government and party posts, increasing Mr. Najibullah's power, although experts contend that there remain serious differences within the Kabul leadership. Last month Mr. Najibullah and almost all the key members of his leadership spent several days in Moscow meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, and other high officials, apparently to plot strategy for coming months. The Soviet leaders were believed by American political analysts to have called for an end to divisions in the leadership and for a more credible effort to persuade some opposition figures to join the Government. Negotiations to try to end the war have been held under United Nations auspices between Pakistan and the Afghan Government. Those talks will resume in Geneva on Feb. 11, with the main unresolved issue being a timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet forces. The Soviet Union has offered in the past to leave within four years, but the Pakistanis and Americans want a withdrawal in three to four months.
