328|1987\01\02|The Bonz Is Ticking|The folks out here at the Fiesta Bowl thought they were smart, moving back their game from New Year's Day to tonight, so they could put on the Miami-Penn State game and decide the unofficial national championship during prime time.|The folks out here at the Fiesta Bowl thought they were smart, moving back their game from New Year's Day to tonight, so they could put on the Miami-Penn State game and decide the unofficial national championship during prime time. The folks out here at the Fiesta Bowl thought they were smart, moving back their game from New Year's Day to tonight, so they could put on the Miami-Penn State game and decide the unofficial national championship during prime time. But action begets reaction, and at the last minute, the Tumbleweed Bowl between Sunbelt State and Rustbelt Tech was shifted to next Monday night. The Tumbleweed Bowl followed the trend and sought corporate sponsorship, but the marketplace was a little slow, so they had to divide the shares. For this year only, the game is officially known as the Convenient Mart/Roach Ridder/Bicarbonate of Soda Tumbleweed Bowl. But on the theory that sports events should not become animated sandwich boards (What's next - the Piggly Wiggly Super Bowl?), we'll stick with pure, simple Tumbleweed Bowl. The shift gave the Tumbleweed Bowl the temporary title of latest bowl game ever, and opened up an audience of all the numb souls who go looking for Monday Night Football, not knowing the regular professional season is over. Early yesterday morning, I got a tip there was trouble at the Tumbleweed Bowl involving the star attraction, Bonzo Sweeney, the fullback from Rustbelt Tech. Bonzo had become popular not just because he could carry the football with four or five tacklers hanging all over him, but because he stuck pink safety pins in his ears, dyed his hair chartreuse and pushed grapefruits into the lenses of hand-held mini-cameras. A production company had made a video of Bonzo singing, ''The Best of Sid Vicious,'' with proceeds going to Bonzo's favorite charity, Fund for the Friends of Boy George. If Bonzo was out of the game, the Tumbleweed Bowl would be in deep trouble. I put in a call to the sports information director at Sunbelt State, an old newspaper buddy of mine. ''What's doing?'' I asked. ''The Feds have locked up Bonzo,'' my man said. ''Look, I know I should be happy that big lug is out of their lineup, but he was our best shot at a high rating. And that's what these bowl games are all about.'' ''I understand that,'' I said, ''but why in the world is a star fullback being held by the Feds?'' ''It's a long story,'' my friend said. ''But let me tell you, this college sports business is so complicated, I almost wish I was back as a news reporter, covering car wrecks and bank robberies and simple stuff like that. Remember when those strip miners pulled pistols on us back in eastern Kentucky?'' ''Those were the good old days,'' I agreed. ''But getting back to college sports, what's happening with Bonzo?'' ''Y ou can't quote me on any of this,'' my pal said. ''But let me give you a little background. It all started when the Fiesta Bowl moved into the New Year's picture a few years back. Nothing wrong with that, is there?'' ''Free enterprise system,'' I said, remembering my high-school civics. ''Darn right. Then this year it just happened that the two best records in the country belonged to two independent teams who were not tied down to any other bowl game. The Fiesta Bowl people, the NBC people and the Miami and Penn State people moved the game to Friday night in prime time.'' ''It meant nobody had any excuse to watch a single minute of football on New Year's Day,'' I said. ''We could all start the year getting healthy out of doors, and wait for the Fiesta Bowl.'' ''But why stop there?'' my friend asked. ''The Tumbleweed Bowl folks wanted to know why they couldn't hold a bowl game next Monday night?'' ''But who would care?'' I asked. ''That game would have no meaning after the Fiesta Bowl.'' ''But suppose something, uh, happened?'' my friend asked. ''Happened?'' ''Look, this year the N.C.A.A. put in drug testing for every bowl game. A few players who tested positive all had logical explanations that they had taken medicine for a virus, or had taken steroids after an injury, all on the advice of personal physicians. Given the side-effects from steroids, I can't imagine most physicians prescribing them. They had to sit out the game just the same.'' ''But those bowl games didn't mean anything,'' I said. ''And all the Fiesta Bowl players have tested clean.'' ''That was the chance we were taking,'' my friend said. ''But suppose enough players were disqualified that Sunbelt State and Rustbelt Tech looked like better teams by Monday night? Or supposing Penn State and Miami got into a brawl during a steak fry and couldn't take the field?'' ''Oh, that was just some gamesmanship on the part of Miami,'' I said. ''We were willing to take the chance,'' my friend said. ''And in the meantime, we had Bonzo, the punk-rock rocker himself, on prime time.'' ''What happened to Bonzo?'' I asked. ''B onzo passed the drug test and the steroid test, no problem,'' my friend said. ''He figured he was home free, and decided to bulk himself up a little more for the professional draft. So he started taking iron pills.'' ''Iron pills?'' ''Hundreds of them,'' my friend said gloomily. ''The clod couldn't wait till he got to the Tumbleweed Bowl. He gulped 'em down before getting on the team bus to the airport. When Bonzo tried to walk through the electronic screening device, every siren in the airport went off. The guards ordered him into a side room to be frisked.'' ''That shouldn't have been a problem,'' I said. ''Bonzo is ticklish,'' my friend groaned. ''Anything less physical than a forearm to his frontal lobe makes him crazy. When the guards frisked him, he started laughing and throwing himself around on the floor. He injured three inspectors and destroyed the room before they could get a straitjacket on him. The Feds charged him with resisting arrest and the judge won't even grant him bail until Tuesday.'' ''Why Tuesday?'' ''The judge is a Notre Dame graduate,'' my friend said. ''He doesn't follow college sports any more, and he thinks the Irish still have a shot at being number one.''  SPORTS OF THE TIMES
