329|1987\01\02|LANDETA DOWNPLAYS PUNT THAT MISSED|Sean Landeta reflected today on his unusual year.|Sean Landeta reflected today on his unusual year. Sean Landeta reflected today on his unusual year. ''I think it's been the best year of my life,'' said the Giants' punter. ''It started out as the worst.'' The bad started on last New Year's Day when the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs said it was investigating a complaint by a fan who accused Landeta of scalping playoff tickets. The investigators subsequently found Landeta innocent. On Jan. 5 came an incident that Landeta refers to sarcastically as ''my good luck in the playoffs.'' When he punted from the end zone in a heavy wind, he barely ticked the ball. Shaun Gayle of the Chicago Bears picked it up and ran 5 yards for the touchdown that started the Bears toward a 21-0 victory. Two games later, the Bears won Super Bowl XX. ''The next day,'' said Landeta, ''was my 24th birthday. I woke up and saw my picture in every newspaper in America screwing up. It was a nice birthday present. Then I got reminded of it 10 times a day for the next three months. So the year didn't start nice.'' Punting Figures Impressive It certainly became nicer. In his second National Football League regular season, which ended two weeks ago, Landeta finished second in gross punting yardage (44.8-yard average to 45.2 for Rohn Stark of the Indianapolis Colts). He finished third in net yardage (37.1 yards to 37.4 for Reggie Roby of the Miami Dolphins and 37.2 for Stark). His steady punting has won him a trip to the Pro Bowl. First, however, there is more work to do for the Giants. They play the San Francisco 49ers here Sunday in a divisional playoff game. If they win, they play here the following Sunday for the conference championship. If they win that, it's on to Pasadena, Calif., for Super Bowl XXI. If all that happens, said Landeta, maybe people will forget the punt that never, or hardly, was. Maybe they will accept him for the good things he has done. Probably not. Landeta said punters usually attracted attention only when something went wrong, ''as I unfortunately found out.'' So he said he had gone through endless conversations like this: Q. ''What happened on that punt?'' A. ''What everybody saw.'' Q. ''You missed the punt.'' A. ''Did you watch the game? What did you see.'' Q. ''It looked like the wind took the ball out of your hands.'' A. ''You answered your question.'' Got Part of the Ball ''When I punted,'' said Landeta, ''I didn't see the ball come off the foot and go up. I didn't feel any explosion. So I knew I didn't get it. Unfortunately, I got a little of it. If I missed it completely, maybe it would have fallen in front of me and maybe I could have fallen on it on the 2- or 3-yard line. And maybe we could have held them to 3 points. ''But I was still in my follow through and the guy on the Bears was picking it up. I thought, 'This is unreal. How could this happen?' '' But it did happen. When Landeta went to the sideline, Bill Parcells, the Giants' coach, asked what happened. Landeta said the wind had taken the ball and he had barely touched it. ''He didn't say a word,'' said Landeta. ''He didn't frown. Nothing. Nobody on the bench said anything except, 'What happened?' Nobody told me not to worry. Nobody consoled me. I didn't feel anything. ''I thought about it for 30 seconds and then forgot it because I knew I had to get back in the game. I punted eight times after that. ''It was a crazy thing that happened. People still ask about it. I'm sure if I did something as good as that was bad, I wouldn't get half the publicity.'' Strictly Negative Every negative story usually has a positive side. Landeta said this one did not. ''There's nothing good about messing up,'' he said. ''It ended up being a good year. And it's not over yet.'' Neither is the memory of the punt that wasn't. The memory comes up at strange times. For example, four months after that Bears game, there was a golfing foursome of Parcells; Ron Erhardt, the Giants' offensive coordinator; Mike Pope, the tight-end coach, and Mickey Corcoran, Parcells's high school basketball coach and mentor. They were on the 16th tee, and all day there had been no talk of football, only golf. Erhardt addressed his ball. He started his backswing. Suddenly, he stopped. Then he turned to the others. He mentioned no names, no teams, no dates. He had just one question. ''How the hell did he miss that punt?'' said Erhardt.
