332|1987\01\02|PASSER KEY TO OFFENSE|Bernie Kosar has big brown eyes that are moving, watching, taking in everything. He is a wary one, even suspicious. He is quiet, studious and occasionally displays a smile that hints of humor.|Bernie Kosar has big brown eyes that are moving, watching, taking in everything. He is a wary one, even suspicious. He is quiet, studious and occasionally displays a smile that hints of humor. Bernie Kosar has big brown eyes that are moving, watching, taking in everything. He is a wary one, even suspicious. He is quiet, studious and occasionally displays a smile that hints of humor. He is, in addition, a quarterback who could conceivably be a key figure in Super Bowl XXI on Jan. 25. Before then, however, there is a playoff game Saturday in Cleveland between his team, the Browns, and the Jets. Kosar is ready for that event, just as he is for Friday night's Sunkist Fiesta Bowl game between Miami - his school - and Penn State. ''I'll be rooting for the old alma mater,'' said Kosar, who could have been playing in that game rather than in a National Football League playoff except for circumstances that he brought about. By the time the Hurricanes or the Nittany Lions kick off, Kosar will have concluded a week-long film study of ''five or six'' Jet games involving about 12 hours of concentration. Jets Called Versatile ''When you play a team that does a lot of different things, like they do, you have to put in a lot more time,'' he said in an interview here, where the Browns worked out this week. The Jets will not get in the way of the Fiesta Bowl game, however. ''If you don't know it by Friday, you'll never know it,'' said Kosar. Kosar turned 23 years old on Nov. 25. He passed up two remaining seasons of college eligibility to join the Browns in 1985. If he had remained in college, he would have been Miami's quarterback rather than Vinny Testaverde. ''I've never regretted the decision to be here,'' said Kosar as he stuffed shoes into an equipment bag. ''Not for a minute.'' By taking up to 20 course-hours a semester plus summer classes, he earned a degree in finance and economics in two and one-half years, thereby becoming eligible for an N.F.L. supplemental draft in June 1985. ''You go to college to get an education, to get a degree,'' he said. ''You can't play football for very long.'' Kosar and the Browns' offense matured together this season. ''There wasn't much there to begin with,'' according to Gary Danielson, the team's veteran backup quarterback. Started From Scratch Lindy Infante was the new offensive coordinator and the often-injured Danielson was to be the starter, with Kosar having another incubation season. The offensive unit was young and only Mike Baab, a center, Ozzie Newsome, a tight end, and Cody Risien, a tackle, had been regulars for more than one season. ''For this team to be where it's at now, to have won 12 games,'' said Danielson, ''everything had to come together. And it did, week by week. ''They gave Bernie more and more, and now he can make every kind of play there is. The last few games this is the best offense I've seen, and I've been around awhile.'' Danielson, an N.F.L. quarterback since 1976, compares Kosar's qualities to those of San Diego's Dan Fouts. ''Both are fiesty and tough,'' he said. How much better was he in December than in September? ''I don't think of myself individually,'' he said. ''I think of the whole offense, and it's 100 percent better.'' Statistics Are Good Kosar, 6 feet 5 inches and 210 pounds, ranked seventh among N.F.L. passers according to the ratings formula. But the ratio most coaches value, touchdowns to interceptions, was a good 17 to 10 and his percentage of interceptions, 1.9, was the league's lowest, a tribute to a quarterback in his first full season as a regular. Like many good passers, Kosar can throw the football in any motion, overhand to underhand or by snap of the wrist. He appreciates this. ''I have the ability to get rid of the ball in a crowd, in a jam,'' he said. In the opinion of his coach, Marty Schottenheimer, Kosar has arrived. ''Bernie is able to run the offense,'' he said, ''to utilize the various things we have in trying to capitalize on what the defense may present. And there is a mental toughness about him that has helped him so much in his development.''  KOSAR AND GASTINEAU POISED FOR CLASH IN BROWNS-JETS GAME
