334|1987\01\02|They Who 'Delivered' Boesky Are Perplexed|One day late last summer, Gary G. Lynch, head of the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division, snapped his fingers, turned briskly from the elevator bank on the fourth-floor of the commission's main building and strode down the hall with a distinct bounce in his step.|One day late last summer, Gary G. Lynch, head of the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division, snapped his fingers, turned briskly from the elevator bank on the fourth-floor of the commission's main building and strode down the hall with a distinct bounce in his step. One day late last summer, Gary G. Lynch, head of the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division, snapped his fingers, turned briskly from the elevator bank on the fourth-floor of the commission's main building and strode down the hall with a distinct bounce in his step. ''We've got some big cases coming,'' the young, lanky lawyer said with a smile. ''We're going to look really good in a couple of months.'' Mr. Lynch's optimism was justified. His division had just broken the Dennis B. Levine $12.6 million insider trading case. Mr. Levine, a merger specialist now awaiting sentencing on four counts of illegal trading, was telling what he knew about other Wall Street operators. And those confessions had led the S.E.C. directly to Ivan F. Boesky, one of most flambuoyant and notoriously prescient stock speculators, who would be charged Nov. 14 with the largest insider trading scheme on record. In settlement of the case against him, Mr. Boesky agreed to pay $100 million in fines and illegal profits for trading on confidential information on planned corporate mergers. In return, the Government agreed to bring only one felony charge against him. Now, six weeks after the Boesky case became public knowledge, Mr. Lynch's mood, and that of the enforcement division, is less than buouant. Emotions range from bitter to confused. The case that was expected to bring the highest accolades has brought with it a raw edge. Bittersweet Fruit ''I don't understand,'' Mr. Lynch lamented recently. ''After the first week or two, everything began to turn negative. The press reports, the reactions from Congress. And here we had given them the most important insider trading case in our history. We had delivered Ivan Boesky.'' Mr. Lynch, who is in his 30's, was obviously tasting the bittersweet fruit of public service. The Boesky case has indeed brought high praise to the S.E.C. from some of its most persistent critics, like John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who heads the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Wall Streeters admit to being at least temporarily shellshocked and intimidated by the dozens of subpoenas issued by the commission's staff. Traders say rumor-mongering about possible takeover stocks has almost dried up. And, depending on how many other lawsuits against investment bankers, takeover lawyers and stock speculators come out of the Boesky investigation, the S.E.C. could exercise this new-found leverage over Wall Street for months to come. But despite what many see as positive results, aspects of the Government's handling of the case remain a question mark in the minds of members of Congress, Wall Street lawyers and especially traders, who say they suffered huge losses when the stock market plunged in the wake of the Boesky disclosures. Why, some ask, did the commission permit Mr. Boesky to sell stocks and close out other transactions totaling $1.4 billion to pay off large levels of debt before the settlement? Did the S.E.C. leave Mr. Boesky with some large store of hidden wealth? Was the agreement to charge him with only one felony count too lenient? Some are raising even larger questions about the ability of the commission to deter other similar illegal schemes over the long run. They cite concern that the commission's modest budgetary resources over the last few years (not much more than $100 million in the current fiscal year) have lagged far behind the growth in the markets, and they say that has sent a subtle signal to would-be lawbreakers that the chances of getting caught are very small. William J. Anderson of the General Accounting Office testified before Congress last month that based on a preliminary analysis of surveillance systems at the S.E.C. and the New York Stock Exchange used to detect insider trading, ''if I wanted to devise a way to trade on insider information and not get detected, I could do it without too much trouble.'' And, in a dramatic reversal, the commission chairman, John S. R. Shad, has agreed to ask for a substantial budget increase, in part to deal with the scope of the Boesky case. ''These are all very valid questions to ask,'' said one prominent securities attorney. ''But the public won't be able to answer them until we see how many other cases come out of Boesky and know more facts.'' Commission officials acknowledge that the continuing criticism is partly justified, because it has released far from enough information for the public to judge the wisdom of certain disputed elememts of the case. ''We have basically come public with only a fraction of the story, and that leads to all kinds of speculation by the public,'' one top commission official said. ''But we're trapped - a Catch-22. If we reveal too much, we will definitely jeopardize future investigations related to the Boesky case. So we have to be big boys and take the heat.'' Perhaps most responsible for the clamp-down on information is Mr. Lynch, who has repeatedly refused in interviews and before Congress to divulge more than what the commission included in its court papers. He has even declined to say how many commission lawyers are working on the case, when the Boesky investigation started or how many subpoenas the commission has issued for more information. ''We don't want to give anyone a sense of the dimension of the case,'' he said. The cautious approach has surprised even his colleagues on occasion. Another top commission official was recently explaining the trading that Mr. Boesky was permitted before the announcement of his $100 million settlement with the commission. Interjecting himself into the conversation, Mr. Lynch told his colleague, ''I don't think we want to talk about any of that,'' and the colleague quickly closed his notebook. In fact, Mr. Lynch was so concerned word of the Boesky investigation would leak out that, according to Congressional sources, he limited the number of commission officials with knowledge of the investigation's existence to 20 and limited the number of enforcement division lawyers on the case to only six. ''I still think Gary might be playing this a little too close to his vest,'' said one commission official. ''The lack of information has permitted some big misrepresentations to get out to the public.'' Some say these reputed misrepresentations (for example, the report, which the S.E.C. denies, that Mr. Boesky videotaped conversations with other investors) may have been deliberately floated by possible objects of S.E.C. investigations in an effort to force premature disclosures that might aid in their own defense. ''I think there definitely are people out there in whose interest it is to make Mr. Boesky seem as bad as possible,'' said Harvey Pitt, one of Mr. Boesky's two lead lawyers. Compared to Hutton Case The criticism over the Boesky case reminds some of that leveled against the Justice Department in 1985 for not indicting any individuals in its celebrated check-kiting case against E. F. Hutton. Although the Government got Hutton to plead guilty to 2,000 counts of mail and wire fraud, its unwillingness to indict any Hutton officials produced howls from Congress. Lawmakers said that by not naming individuals, the Government greatly reduced the deterrent effect of the case. Likewise, some argue that permitting Mr. Boesky to continue trading while under investigation or leaving him with substantial assets might not deter other violators. ''I think this could be a case where a settlement between the Government and the defendant that seemed good for both sides turns out to be much costlier for both,'' one securities attorney said. According to some experts on S.E.C. operations, the commission simply may not have anticipated the public scrutiny the Boesky case would engender. ''There's no way they could have predicted the outcry from arbitrageurs who lost billions of dollars,'' said one trader. Mary M. McCue, the commission's director of public affiars, says her office received hundreds of inquiries the first two weeks after the Boesky disclosures. After the initial flurry died down, she had buttons printed up for her modest staff that read ''We survived Boesky.''  WASHINGTON TALK: SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
