337|1987\01\02|New Shop Is Setting Fast Pace|BETH LEIBLER and Barbara Borejko started their advertising agency, B-Designed, just four months ago.|BETH LEIBLER and Barbara Borejko started their advertising agency, B-Designed, just four months ago. BETH LEIBLER and Barbara Borejko started their advertising agency, B-Designed, just four months ago. Since then, the little shop has turned out work ranging from a sleek, campaign for the Wool Bureau to a homey mail-order brochure for Barney Greenglass, who calls himself the Sturgeon King. The agency's founders have known each other for only about a year -they met when they were hired to open a catalogue production office. ''We built that business from nothing to $750,000 in accounts in a matter of months, and then looked at each other and said, 'Why are we doing all the work and letting them make all the money?' '' said Ms. Leibler, 36 years old. She was the creative copy director at Macy's before she joined the catalogue venture. Ms. Borejko, 39, had worked as a freelance art director and creative consultant for such companies as Bally Shoes and Nabisco Brands. In July, after nine months of working for the catalogue operation, the two set up their advertising and direct-mail services agency at 1140 Avenue of the Americas. '' We wanted to do all the packaging and selling, really see the project through,'' said Ms. Borejko. Ms. Leibler said that their first client was Sage-Allen & Company, a Connecticut department store chain they had worked with before. ''We did another catalogue for them, but we also did their Christmas ads and arranged special events to draw people into the store. We even helped launch a new store opening,'' she said. ''Now, whatever they need, we're there to help.'' Ms. Leibler entered advertising as a copywriter - extolling the virtues of Lane Bryant bras and girdles, then moving on to Ohrbach's department store, where, as creative copy director, she developed a series of radio ads featuring the comedy team of Stiller and Meara, before moving to Macy's. Ms. Borejko learned her craft as an art director in the fashion and retailing world - working on catalogues and print ads for Modern Bride, Avon and Lord & Taylor. At Avon, she created a succesful perfume campaign. ''This was the perfume to wear if you really wanted to let go,'' she said. Today, as advertising firms have been growing bigger and bigger, B-Designed hopes to make a virtue of its smallness. ''I think clients are looking for smaller, creative shops that will give them personal attention,'' Ms. Borejko said. ADVERTISING
