342|1987\01\02|U.S. Tariffs Raise Europe's Hackles|Europeans are responding angrily to the latest salvo in a trade dispute with the United States.|Europeans are responding angrily to the latest salvo in a trade dispute with the United States. Europeans are responding angrily to the latest salvo in a trade dispute with the United States. A statement from the office of the French Prime Minister, Jacques Chirac, warned of ''a grave threat of confrontation'' after Washington announced duties of 200 percent on some European Community products in response to the loss of United States grain markets in Spain. Michel Noir, Mr. Chirac's Trade Minister, in an apparent jab at President Reagan, referred to the American steps on French radio as ''the Rambo method'' and pledged Europe would retaliate ''an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,'' if the tariffs were implemented. American officials in Europe are also worried about the hardening of the trade dispute. ''The danger of protectionism is greater now than at any time since the 1930's,'' Richard R. Burt, the United States Ambassador to West Germany, told an interviewer there recently. Precedence for Settlement In the past, the European Community and Washington demonstrated an admirable record in defusing trade disputes, including recent conflicts over steel and steel products and foodstuffs such as wheat products and pasta. The latest disputes, however, come about at a time when export markets for European goods are shrinking in the oil-producing countries of the Middle East and in debt-strapped developing areas. Meanwhile, a growing flow of Japanese goods has been deflected from North America to Europe. All in all, the United States and Western Europe face an uphill struggle to avoid a major trade conflict this year. The United States has threatened retaliatory duties on British gin, French brandy and white wines and Dutch cheeses, among other products. The duties will go into effect no later than Jan. 30, if Washington and the European Community cannot agree on compensation. GATT Talks Jeopardized The trade issues are significant because they add to a logjam of unresolved questions that are delaying the start of a fresh round of international negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to liberalize and expand world trade. European officials appear to believe that at least some of the Reagan Administration's sudden burst of activity is designed to blunt the edge of an aggressive Democratic-controlled Congress, which, Europeans fear, could restrict imports. The United States duties announced this week came only days after West Germany and Switzerland were caught off guard by a United States measure to limit imports of machine tools. Though the restriction was aimed primarily at Japan and Taiwan, there was a symbolic significance to it that frightened the Germans and Swiss, who have been among the staunchest proponents of open trade. But the list of grievances is longer.  Last month, the Reagan Administration said it would hold separate talks with France, West Germany and Britain om a complaint that they are pledging excessive subsidies to new versions of the Airbus, the jointly built European civilian aircraft that competes increasingly with American aircraft of the Boeing and McDonnell Douglas companies. And there is a smoldering conflict over telecommunications equipment, one of the largest areas of trans-Atlantic trade. The Federal Communications Commission said last month that it would begin an inquiry into how to operate a blockade of foreign suppliers. The move stems from charges that the United States has moved more quickly to deregulate its telecommunications markets, opening them to foreign suppliers, than the Europeans have.
