346|1987\01\02|Shuttle Accords Avert a Showdown|In reaching settlements with the families of four astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster, the Justice Department and Morton Thiokol Inc. appear to have avoided, at least for now, engaging in a court dispute between the Government and one of its chief contractors.|In reaching settlements with the families of four astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster, the Justice Department and Morton Thiokol Inc. appear to have avoided, at least for now, engaging in a court dispute between the Government and one of its chief contractors. In reaching settlements with the families of four astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster, the Justice Department and Morton Thiokol Inc. appear to have avoided, at least for now, engaging in a court dispute between the Government and one of its chief contractors. Legal experts said that both sides desperately wanted to avoid such a clash in court. But a dispute may yet surface if the families of three other crew members press their cases. If so, it would probably center on one question: Who was more responsible for the Challenger disaster, the manufacturer of the space shuttle's solid booster rockets or the Federal agency that was supposed to be overseeing its work? That question would probably have come to the fore if Federal officials had simply settled the families' claims against the Government, and left Morton Thiokol, the manufacturer of the rockets, to deal separately with the families. All Claims Dropped Instead, the Justice Department included the rocket maker in the settlement, and the families agreed to drop all further claims against any of the space shuttle contractors. Neither Government officials nor Thiokol would discuss the reasons such an accord was reached. Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, who were not directly involved in the negotiations, say privately that Thiokol's inclusion probably saved the Chicago-based company millions of dollars in legal fees and potential jury judgments. ''Letting Morton Thiokol fight these cases alone wasn't a viable choice,'' said Mark A. Dombroff, formerly the director of the torts branch of the Justice Department's civil division, which handled air crash litigation for the Government. Noting that NASA officials would inevitably be drawn into suits between Thiokol and the families, he added: ''The Government wouldn't be buying any peace.'' Unsettled Claims Justice Department officials declined to discuss the settlements or their legal strategy, noting that the claims of three families - including one that has a suit pending against Thiokol - are unresolved. Nor would they provide details of the settlement. The amount to be paid to the families, a cost being shared by Thiokol and the government, has not been released. ''It's not something we are interested in talking about,'' said Philip Wyna, director of corporate development at Thiokol. ''The only thing we are saying is that we are making a substantial payment toward the settlements.'' At the Justice Department, Amy Brown, a spokesman, said that ''the settlement should not be construed as an admission of liability or negligence by Morton Thiokol.'' 4 Families Involved The settlements involved the families of Francis R. Scobee, the mission commander, and Air Force Lieut. Col. Ellison S. Onizuko. They also included two non-Government employees: Gregory B. Jarvis, who worked for the Hughes Aircraft Corporation, and Christa McAuliffe, the New Hampshire schoolteacher who was to have been the first ''teacher in space.'' No settlements have been reached with the families of Judith A. Resnick, Michael J. Smith or Ronald E. McNair. Mr. McNair's survivors have filed suit against Thiokol. In recent months, legal experts have said that should Thiokol go to court, it would probably assert two primary defenses. First, they speculated, the company would contend that it was immune from liability because it was acting in behalf of the Government. In May, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, sitting in Richmond, overturned awards against three contractors made to the families of four men killed in military air crashes. It ruled that the Government's sovereign immunity extends to its contractors. Thiokol's second defense would probably be that officials at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, which was overseeing the booster rocket project, were ultimately responsible for the accident. Such a contention could lead to presentations of the same witnesses and documents that dominated the hearings of the Presidential commission that investigated the accident. ''It would be a very ugly scene,'' one senior NASA official said recently. Noting that the commission, chaired by former Secretary of State William P. Rogers, had carefully avoided placing blame on individuals, the official added: ''All of a sudden, everyone would be pointing fingers.'' Insurance Coverage Under the terms of its contract, Thiokol carries insurance for the first $500 million in judgments against the company for the failure of its rockets. Beyond that figure, the company was indemnified by the Government, according to Susan Smith, the general counsel of the Marshall Space Flight Center. By contrast, Rockwell International, the maker of the shuttle orbiter, is now indemnified by the Government for all judgments resulting from a failure of its equipment. It was Rockwell, not the Government, that paid the survivors of the three astronauts killed in the Apollo 1 launch-pad fire in 1967. Meanwhile, Ms. Smith said she is negotiating with Thiokol over the company's penalty for the failure of its rocket, a penalty that could reach $10 million under terms of the contract.
