351|1987\01\02|BIG PRICE INCREASES SHAKE BRAZILIANS|After what one local economist called ''a hiatus of generalized happiness,'' Brazilians appear to be rapidly losing faith in the anti-inflation program decreed by the Government last February.|After what one local economist called ''a hiatus of generalized happiness,'' Brazilians appear to be rapidly losing faith in the anti-inflation program decreed by the Government last February. After what one local economist called ''a hiatus of generalized happiness,'' Brazilians appear to be rapidly losing faith in the anti-inflation program decreed by the Government last February. Only a few months ago, when a price freeze stimulated wild consumer spending, the country seemed entranced by the promise of ''zero inflation.'' But price jumps running at an annual rate of 70 percent in November and December have now forced the Government to revive a recently discarded ''indexation'' system linking interest rates and wages to inflation. Some Prices Double As a final burst of Christmas spending gave way to the New Year, the ''meltdown'' of the price freeze was also at hand. Some products doubled in price today, and others, including meat and eggs, are available mainly on the black market through payment of an illegal premium. One immediate consequence of the wave of economic uncertainty is that the country's Finance Minister, Dilson Funaro, whose identity with the so-called Cruzado Plan had won him enormous popularity, is now the target of bitter criticism. His offer to resign was rejected by President Jose Sarney in late November, but there is once again intense speculation that he may soon be replaced. ''The Cruzado Plan is dead,'' said Affonso Celso Pastore, a former Central Bank president who criticized the price freeze at its inception. ''Its death certificate will give the cause as 'generalized inflationary infection affecting all vital organs, stimulating the spread of indexation,' the same tumor that was so brilliantly removed on Feb. 28.'' Freeze Tied to Election Other economists, bankers and businessmen have criticized the Government for maintaining the boom provoked by frozen prices until after nationwide elections Nov. 15. They charge that this move not only disrupted the domestic economy, but also created financial problems on the eve of crucial negotiations to restructure Brazil's $110 billion foreign debt, the largest in the developing world. Economic growth estimated at over 11 percent in 1986 sucked in imports and found a home for products once destined for export, with the result that the monthly trade surplus fell from an average of over $1 billion as recently as July to little over $100 million in November and December. At the same time, foreign exchange reserves tumbled to about $5 billion, from $11 billion, in just 12 months. ''This was an external crisis entirely made in Brazil,'' one economist noted acidly. A Fatuous Belief Noted ''The curious thing,'' Senator Roberto Campos, a former Planning Minister, said, ''is that the population really believed a simple decree freezing prices could result in a miracle that has been sought for millennia -a painless cure for inflation, accompanied by rapid growth and redistribution of income.'' The turning-point came Nov. 21 when the administration finally moved to slow down the economy by sharply raising prices and taxes for a number of goods and services. Coming just six days after the governing party won a stunning victory in the mid-term elections thanks to the popularity of the price freeze, the so-called Cruzado Plan II provoked angry protests and even an attempt by the labor movement to paralyze the country in a general strike Dec. 12. Arguing that the increases were ''necessary adjustments'' as the economy moved from a price freeze to price controls, Mr. Funaro has insisted that Brazil can still avoid both inflation and recession in the coming year. In an article this week, though, the Finance Minister implicitly accepted the ''death'' of the Cruzado Plan, noting that its main ''legacy'' was to strengthen ''the structural conditions for economic and social growth.'' Too Little, Too Late Yet, even among businessmen who profited handsomely from the recent consumer boom and now recognize the need for deflationary measures, the Sarney administration is perceived to have done too little, too late. ''The fact is that the Government became immobilized and did not adopt the measures that were not politically attractive,'' Luis Eulalio de Bueno Vidigal, a prominent business leader, said. Further, since the Cruzado Plan II, private-sector confidence has not been restored. ''One gets the impression that the Government is disorientated by what's going on,'' one well-placed foreign banker said. ''It has no coherent policy, its credibility has gone. It announced this week that interest rates would only be indexed for January and February, but no one believes that.'' Officials said the Government acted to protect real interest rates for savings accounts and treasury bonds and to bring down nominal interest rates, which were running at around 240 percent last month. They also conceded that wages will automatically increase when accumulated inflation since February 1986 reaches 20 percent, probably later this month. The Government's hope is that it can bring order to the economy before the first anniversary of the Cruzado Plan by signing a ''social pact'' with business and labor groups aimed at curbing price increases and wage demands. Having given civil servants an extra month's salary for 1986 and a 25 percent wage increase as of Jan. 1, however, it will be under pressure to demonstrate that it is not contributing to inflation.
