352|1987\01\02|O'CONNOR, IN JERUSALEM, APOLOGIZES TO ISRAELIS|John Cardinal O'Connor of New York today used the occasion of his first public ceremony in Israel to apologize to the country's people and Government for canceling meetings he had scheduled with leading Israelis.|John Cardinal O'Connor of New York today used the occasion of his first public ceremony in Israel to apologize to the country's people and Government for canceling meetings he had scheduled with leading Israelis. John Cardinal O'Connor of New York today used the occasion of his first public ceremony in Israel to apologize to the country's people and Government for canceling meetings he had scheduled with leading Israelis. ''It is fitting and it behooves me to say that I deeply regret and certainly apologize for any offenses that might have been perceived as intended by those who govern Israel,'' he declared at a New Year's Day mass in St. Saviour's Church, in the Old City of Jerusalem, The Cardinal, in remarks from the altar that he later said had not been planned, took the blame for hastily scheduling then rescinding appointments with President Chaim Herzog and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. No Ill Will, He Says He said he had not realized that Vatican protocols forbade meetings in Jerusalem with top-ranking Israelis. The Vatican does not recognize Israeli control over the city, the eastern part of which was captured from Jordan and annexed during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. ''I failed to be sufficiently thorough in my preparations,'' he said. ''I failed to familiarize myself with the protocols normally surrounding a visit by a member of the College of Cardinals. Because of that error on my part, unfortunately, it is quite understandable that the people of Israel and those in the Government might well have construed some deliberately intended offense.'' The Cardinal also asserted that the error had been made without any ill will, that the Vatican too ''bears no ill will'' toward Israel and that he hoped to find an opportunity to make ''whatever compensation can appropriately be made.'' The Cardinal's dramatic apology, which he delivered at the end of a mass stressing Pope John Paul II's World Day of Peace message, came after more than a week of bruised feelings here over the planning of the trip. Both Mr. Shamir and Mr. Herzog had said they would refuse to meet the Cardinal anywhere but in their offices in Jerusalem. Shimon Peres, the Foreign Minister, who extended the original invitation to the Cardinal to visit Israel, has also been reluctant to meet with him outside his Jerusalem office and no meeting has been scheduled. But the Cardinal did meet today with Jerusalem's Mayor, Teddy Kollek, at the Mayor's municipal offices. The two described their meeting as warm and gracious and both took the occasion to place a cheerful phone call to Mayor Koch in New York. Mr. Kollek said that at their 45-minute meeting he had tried to explain to the Cardinal that Jerusalem had been a Jewish capital since biblical days, that the Israeli Government had protected Christian and Moslem holy sites since it took over the whole of the city and that the city was freer for worship than it had ever been before. In 1967, Mr. Kollek noted, 200 Israeli soldiers died trying to recapture the Old City because the army decided not to use artillery or other weapons that might damage holy sites. A Distinction Is Noted A reporter asked Mr. Kollek why the Cardinal would meet with him in Jerusalem but not with other Israeli leaders. The Mayor replied, ''Because the city is not a political entity, it is an administrative entity.'' When the reporter responded that he did not understand what that distinction meant, the Mayor replied, ''Neither do I.'' The Mayor praised the Cardinal for righting a diplomatic gaffe ''very graciously by taking the blame on himself.'' There was no immediate response from other Israeli officials to the Cardinal's apology. After a four-day trip to Jordan, where he made several statements expressing support for the right of Palestinians to self-determination, the Cardinal entered Israel by walking across the Allenby Bridge, a short, narrow span over the muddy Jordan River. The Cardinal said he chose to enter Israel on foot as pilgrims had done for centuries. Few pilgrims, however, are met by a crowd of jostling reporters and photographers, as Cardinal O'Connor was today. Archbishop Carlo Curis, the Apostolic Delegate to Jerusalem, welcomed the Cardinal. But Israel was respresented only by two low-level Foreign Ministry officials and the Ministry of Religious Affairs. This was in sharp contrast to the Cardinal's arrival in Jordan on Sunday night when he was met by the Minister of Islamic Affairs, the Governor of Amman and the Secretary General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Cardinal also met with King Hussein and other high-ranking Jordanian leaders. A spokesman for the Israeli Foreign Ministry said Wednesday that Israel had downgraded the Cardinal's visit to a private rather than an official event. 'Next Year in Jerusalem' The Cardinal, exploiting the fact that he entered Israel on New Year's Day, told reporters, ''Yesterday I said in Amman, 'Next year in Jerusalem,' so I kept my promise.'' The Cardinal's motor caravan drove from the bridge through the ancient city of Jericho, then headed out of the river valley up bare mountains tinged with pink and orange and dotted with Bedouin tents and the mud hovels of Palestinians. Just outside Jerusalem, but still in the occupied West Bank, the motorcade passed Maale Adumim, a town first settled after the 1967 war by Israelis who believe the West Bank is part of Israel's larger biblical legacy. The town, with its modernistic housing, has now become a growing suburb of Jerusalem. The motorcade went directly to St. Saviour's Church, where the Cardinal donned white vestments and a miter and celebrated a Latin mass at the invitation of James Beltretti, the Patriarch of the Latin Rite churches in Israel, Jordan and Cyprus. The Cardinal's homily was based on the Pope's World Day of Peace message, but, in veiled fashion, he sounded themes that he had struck while in Jordan that called attention to the plight of the Palestinians. The Cardinal emphasized the Pope's words that the ''solidarity of the human family'' implies that all human beings are ''equal in dignity'' and ''endowed with fundamental and inalienable human rights.'' He spoke of the homelessness of Joseph and Mary in the Gospel, a theme that echoed his repeated references to the homelessness of the Palestinians. Joseph and Mary, he said, had to flee into a hostile environment, but were ''finally able to return to their homeland.'' The Cardinal also read a long excerpt from Elie Wiesel's ''Night'' in which Mr. Wiesel wrote how as a boy he had watched his father die of hunger and illness in a concentration camp. When his father at the end asked him for water, the young boy in ''Night'' was afraid to risk blows from the camp police and did not bring the water. The Cardinal said Mr. Wiesel was haunted by his failure to heed his father's summons and dedicated his life thereafter to strengthening human dignity. A Word to the Violent The Cardinal said he wondered if the world responded to the Pope's summonses when he spoke of peace with justice or asked for an end to weapons stockpiles. The Cardinal called on ''those who practice violence and terrorism'' to ''turn away from violence even if the goals thereof are just.'' ''The way of violence cannot obtain justice,'' he said. He ended the homily with a paraphrasing of a Jewish blessing, ''May the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,'' he said, ''shine his face on all of us, turn his countenance to each of us, and grant us peace.'' The Cardinal later explained that when he saw the numbers of reporters gathered at the church, he decided ''impromptu'' to make an apology ''to all peoples of Israel and its Government.'' He said he had intended some statement because he recognized ''how deeply wounded feelings were.'' 'Out of a Fellini Movie' After lunch the Cardinal took part in a procession to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, the site where Christians believe Jesus was crucified and entombed before the Resurrection. The procession of colorfully clad clergy was led by drummers from a Roman Catholic corps of Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts and by men wearing fezzes and carrying sheathed swords at their side. The procession wound through narrow stone-paved streets lined with shops selling souvenirs, jewelry, brass and wood and crowded with tourists and merchants in Arab headdress. Policemen and rifle-bearing Israeli troops tried to restrain the dozens of photographers and television crew members pushing for a better glimpse of the Cardinal. Astonished by the mixture of sacredness, pomp and chaos, the Cardinal's secretary, Msgr. James McCarthy, said later, ''It was a scene out of a Fellini movie.''
