354|1987\01\02|ALBANY PAGEANT: POMP AND POLITICS|Coming the day after Governor Cuomo announced a series of out-of-state trips, his inauguration seemed to many to be less the culmination of a gubernatorial election than the start of a Presidential race.|Coming the day after Governor Cuomo announced a series of out-of-state trips, his inauguration seemed to many to be less the culmination of a gubernatorial election than the start of a Presidential race. Coming the day after Governor Cuomo announced a series of out-of-state trips, his inauguration seemed to many to be less the culmination of a gubernatorial election than the start of a Presidential race. While the Governor has consistently maintained that the trips, which will include visits to California, Florida and Louisiana, indicate no aspirations beyond New York, both supporters and opponents of a Presidential bid were swapping opinions. ''I don't think he should run for President,'' said the Rev. Garen Gdanian, one of the clergymen invited to the Governor's mansion for brunch before the inauguration. ''He should stay here four more years and then run.'' Sylvia Weprin, who with her husband Saul, a State Assemblyman, has held a party on the night before each Cuomo inauguration, saw things differently. Shortly after midnight on New Year's Eve she announced, ''Next time in Washington.'' With 18 million people in the state of New York and fewer than 600 orchestra seats at the Governor's inauguration, there were bound to be some who tried to sit where they were not allowed. Larry Stone, 15 years old, an usher in a military-style uniform of his school, the Christian Brothers Academy of Albany, reported that despite his efforts, several people had managed to slip small children in under false pretenses, and others had simply barreled their way in. Not one to be pushed around, Larry refused to let a tall, balding man without a ticket get past him, until someone whispered threateningly that he was holding up Ed Koch. Larry said he was not embarrassed that he had not recognized the Mayor of New York City. ''What, am I supposed to know everyone?'' he asked. Despite a turnout of 4,200 people, several prominent political figures did not attend, including Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Alfonse M. D'Amato, former Gov. Hugh L. Carey and the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, who was the Governor's Republican opponent in the last election. Also absent was Warren M. Anderson, the majority leader of the Republican-controlled State Senate. Subdued giggles could be heard when the members of the State Senate were solemnly announced, and 4 out of 61 straggled out. Orchestrating the inauguration, a pageant involving hundreds of student musicians, scores of state officials and eight Indian chiefs, is not an easy task. A lot of people, anticipating the Governor's landslide victory, actually urged the chairman of the inaugural committee, Tonio Burgos, to start planning the inauguration before the election results were in. Indeed, he said, someone had even gone so far as to suggest this in a memo. ''I urged them to destroy that memo,'' Mr. Burgos said. ''I thought it was a little presumptuous.'' In keeping with the Governor's theme of ''doing more with less,'' this year's inauguration, more elaborate than ever, cost less than the last one, which cost less than the one before. Organizers of the inauguration said the key to coming in under $50,000 this year was finding free goods. A 10-foot-tall rendering of the New York State seal that stood by the entrance to the auditorium, for example, was borrowed from the World Trade Center. The poinsettias that lined the stage were grown in state prisons. Organizers of the inauguration, which for the purposes of live television coverage was to last precisely 58 minutes, left little room for chance to interfere. Participants in the procession were warned not to hold things up, as had the last lieutenant governor, Alfred Del Bello, when the announcement of his appearance coincided with a trip by him to the men's room. Audience members were warned to expect the boom of the 19-gun salute, so they would not panic, as they had last time, and think it was a bomb. In a remarkable example of fail-safe planning, a young man was stationed inside the lectern to hand the Governor a copy of his address in case the Teleprompter broke down. ''Basically, I did it because of the Governor,'' said the young man, Michael McCartin, a student at the State University of New York at Binghamton. ''I really admire him.'' For the four men who took the oath of office here today, the inauguration was a happy occasion, suffused with the sweet smell of success. But for mothers, nothing is ever so simple. Ruth Lundine, whose son Stan was sworn in as lieutenant governor, said she had to confess that she was happier when he was in Congress. In that job, she said, at least he came home to his native Jamestown every summer to be with his constituents, not to mention his mother. In fact, Mrs. Lundine, who is 73 years old, admitted that although she knew it was politically incorrect to say so, she really had no grand ambitions for Stan. ''I was perfectly happy when he was Mayor of Jamestown,'' she said. The theme of the reception following the inauguration was ''Celebrating New York,'' and there appeared to be enough food to invite most of the state. The underground mall beneath the Capitol was decked out as a hodgepodge of neighborhoods from across the state and outfitted with scores of hot-dog stands, apple carts and pretzel vendors. Representing Jamaica, Queens, was a wall painting of the Governor's father's Italian grocery store; in front of it was a display of kosher food. Freihofer's bakery in Albany donated a five-tier, 500-pound cake topped with 600 pounds of icing. In the spirit of the occasion, the cake was decorated with the state seal, the state bird (bluebird), the state tree (sugar maple) and the state animal (beaver). Missing, however, was the state fossil, sea scorpion. At the end of the ceremony, there was no shortage of sentimentality as the families of the inaugurated, including the Governor's 84-year-old mother, Immaculata, came together for a photo opportunity. As the flashbulbs flared, the recorded voice of Neil Diamond filled the hall with a jazzed-up version of ''My Country, 'tis of Thee,'' which has become the Governor's theme song. Only Mark Lundine, 10, seemed unaffected by all the emotion. When the Governor invited him to clap along with the music, he declined.
