362|1987\01\02|RENEWAL RITUALS CHRISTEN THE NEW YEAR|A balloon, still inflated, skipped with the wind down Broadway yesterday, perhaps the last celebrant of the night before.|A balloon, still inflated, skipped with the wind down Broadway yesterday, perhaps the last celebrant of the night before. A balloon, still inflated, skipped with the wind down Broadway yesterday, perhaps the last celebrant of the night before. A champagne bottle, its cork long-since popped, poked past the rim of a garbage can on 44th Street, not far from a scattering of confetti. Two sheets, sewn together and stretched between two slats of wood, lay behind the boarded-up Armed Services recruiting station in Times Square, bearing a spray-painted message: ''Happy New Year U.S.A. From the Motor City.'' The three-card monte men were back at their boxes. The roar of video-war poured through the door at Playland. A line had formed at the TKTS booth on Duffy Square. And George M. Cohan, in statuary vigil, still cast his regard down Broadway. It was all over, including the shouting.  And yet, a new year had dawned; a new start, replete with hope and resolve. At 7:22 A.M., by the watch of Toshimitsu Kuroiwa, the sun rose, then pushed past puffy clouds, out over the horizon from the easternmost point of the metropolitan area, Montauk, L.I. Mr. Kuroiwa was among about 30 people who witnessed the first new day of the new year from the wind-whipped beach. ''In Japan, many people come to see the first sunrise of the year,'' said Mr. Kuroiwa, an official at the Japan Trade Center in Manhattan, who has lived in Bayside, Queens, for a year and a half. In his country, he said, sunrise is ''a symbol of natural phenomena, of great things.'' There, too, in the shadow of the Montauk Lighthouse, stood 20-year-old Marcy Fyock, an assistant manager at Flower Time in Patchogue, L.I. ''You can get your thoughts together here, it's so peaceful,'' she said. She and three friends had celebrated in Times Square at midnight, then drove to Montauk Point on a whim. ''We were pretty much the first on the beach,'' Miss Fyock said. ''We didn't expect there would be anybody else. Then, we said, 'Boy, there are other fools, too.' '' Just after dawn, Masaru Yamai, who lives in Valley Stream, shadowboxed on the beach. ''First I pray for health for my wife and daughters,'' he said. ''After that, I plunge into the water.'' At a discreet distance, he disrobed and walked over rocks and into the rough surf. A breaker immediately reminded him of the power of nature and sent him sprawling. Mr. Yamai remained, only his head above the waves, for about 30 seconds, then strode up the beach to his clothes. ''The idea is not how much you suffer,'' he said. ''It is what your spirit tells you.'' Just five hours earlier, in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn - a haven for Soviet emigres - revelers were still going strong. Yura A. Dimov stopped to talk about what the New Year would bring. ''What God will give,'' said Mr. Dimov, who came to the United States nine years ago from Kiev. In America, Mr. Dimov said, it is important to believe in God. ''God gave us freedom,'' he said. Boris Golbraykh, who came to the United States eight years ago from Byelorussia, wished ''happiness and peace'' for everyone in the coming year. Across the country, New Year's celebrations assumed a variety of forms. In San Francisco, several hundred people gathered to exchange greetings, via satellite hook-up, with a similar crowd in Moscow. ''We think the more people communicate directly with each other, the greater the chance we will reduce tensions between the two political systems,'' said Joel Schwartz, who organized the event. Above the Benjamin Franklin Bridge between Philadelphia and Camden, N.J., fireworks saluted the start of the bicentennial celebration of the United States Constitution, which was signed Sept. 17, 1787, at Independence Hall. And in Rochester, 50,000 people raised their razzes in an outdoor kazoo concert. Hundreds of runners began the New Year on a healthful note with a five-mile race through Central Park that began at the stroke of midnight. Some on the sidelines resolved that 1987 would be the year that they, too, would become more health-conscious. Myrna Albert, a 49-year-old teacher from Queens, was dressed in her running attire. But at the last minute, she said: ''I chickened out. It was just a little intimidating. I give myself credit for getting this far.'' Next year, Miss Albert asserted, she will ''actually run the race.'' June Vollmann, a writer from Manhattan, promised herself, ''I'm going to lose 20 pounds,'' adding, ''I say that every year.'' A magazine editor, Natalie Gerardi, who was also watching the race, had a resolution of a different sort. ''A group of women friends decided that we're going to meet once a month for general discussion,'' she said. ''It's sort of a return to the consciousness-raising days. We used to do it and we miss it, so we're going to do it again.'' Margie Appel, a 26-year-old framer from Greenwich Village, resolved ''to have as many successes in 1987 as I did in '86.'' In the last year, she said, ''I moved to New York, I got a job that I love, found a new boyfriend whom I love and found an apartment - on Central Park West.'' Later yesterday morning, at Strawberry Fields in Central Park, a Manhattan artist, Brookie Maxwell, and six friends celebrated New Year's Day by installing a temporary sculpture of the Beatles in their Sergeant Pepper outfits. ''It's a present to the city for the holidays,'' Ms. Maxwell said of the work. ''We were looking for something that would be happy. It's sort of our Peter Pan or Alice in Wonderland; it's the equivalent for our generation.'' At 10 A.M., the group posed for pictures and toasted their creation. For some, New Year's Day was best observed in solitude. Ted Richter strolled alone in Battery Park, tossing crumbs to the pigeons and squirrels scuttling beneath the bare trees. ''I've been out here for three hours,'' Mr. Richter said, adding that he feeds the sparrows and squirrels about three times a week, because ''the little ones, they lose out.'' Despite overcast skies and a chill, scores of people chose to celebrate the day by taking a ferry ride to Liberty Island. Among those bundled-up for an early-afternoon crossing were three couples who poured themselves pink champagne and sang ''Auld Lang Syne.'' ''We've been doing this for 14 years,'' said Gail Strickland, who wore a pointed party hat with her mink. She and her husband flew in from Los Angeles for the event, which was organized by Walter and Sally Wekstein of Boston. Once on the island, a member of the group said that Jan. 1 is the day that all racehorses officially turn a year older. ''Happy birthday, horses,'' they cried.
