364|1987\01\02|'A MURDER IS ANNOUNCED,' MISS MARPLE ON 'MYSTERY!'|ONE of the more consistent rewards of watching public television's ''Mystery!'' series has been the performance of Joan Hickson, a British character actress in her 80's, as Agatha Christie's Miss Marple. Other actresses, including Margaret Rutherford and Helen Hayes, have done well by the role, but none have captured the amateur sleuth's tiny eccentricities and enormous shrewdness so accurately.|ONE of the more consistent rewards of watching public television's ''Mystery!'' series has been the performance of Joan Hickson, a British character actress in her 80's, as Agatha Christie's Miss Marple. Other actresses, including Margaret Rutherford and Helen Hayes, have done well by the role, but none have captured the amateur sleuth's tiny eccentricities and enormous shrewdness so accurately. ONE of the more consistent rewards of watching public television's ''Mystery!'' series has been the performance of Joan Hickson, a British character actress in her 80's, as Agatha Christie's Miss Marple. Other actresses, including Margaret Rutherford and Helen Hayes, have done well by the role, but none have captured the amateur sleuth's tiny eccentricities and enormous shrewdness so accurately. Beginning tomorrow at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, Miss Hickson can be seen in ''A Murder Is Announced,'' a three-part series, adapted quite smartly for television by Alan Plater. The time is the 1940's, shortly after World War II. The small village in this particular tale is called Chipping Cleghorn. All is reassuringly calm until one day the local newspaper is published with an advertisement announcing that a murder will take place that very evening at 7 at Little Paddocks, the home of Letitia Blacklock. Suddenly all is atwitter (''How scrumptious,'' exclaims one sweet lady) and Miss Blacklock's closest friends are preparing to visit her at the appointed hour. It's highly unlikely, of course, that anything will happen, but just in case. Among the more prominent characters: playful Julia and Patrick, brother and sister, who have recently shown up as Miss Blacklock's young cousins; Philipa, another young relative, with a propensity to dourness; dear Miss Bunner, Miss Blacklock's old school chum and something of a ''scatty'' old lady; Colonel Easterbrook, once of India, and his wife with the badly bleached blond hair; the mannish Miss Hinchcliffe and her gently dizzy housemate Miss Murgatroyd; a darling little mother and her grown son, who insists he is a Communist, and, hardly least, the very foreign-looking maid, a war refugee. It is, in short, the usual type of unlikely mix that Agatha Christie found irresistible. In any event, with everybody gathered together, the clock strikes 7 and the announced murder does indeed take place. The lights go off, a figure enters the room with a flashlight and shots are heard. When light is restored, the intruder, a young man wearing a mask, is found dead and Miss Blacklock is nursing a bleeding ear, apparently nicked by the bullet meant to kill her. Did the stranger commit suicide when his murder plot went awry? Nothing, obviously, could be that simple at the very beginning of a Miss Marple story. The police inspector (John Castle) suspects foul play, but a little old lady in sensible shoes and proper gray suit has no doubt whatsoever. Miss Marple happens to be staying at a nearby hotel where the dead man, a Swiss national, worked as a clerk. She has already discovered that he doctored one of her personal checks in his favor. Furthermore, she tells the inspector, ''It struck me that the man had a shifty eye, the kind that looks straight at you and never blinks.'' In no time at all, Miss Marple has the police searching for a murder suspect, and she reminds the inspector that ''some of the best murderers are women, especially in an English village.'' Produced by Guy Slater and directed by David Giles, this BBC-Arts & Entertainment co-production has a delicious supporting cast, ranging from such veterans as Sylvia Syms, Joyce Carey, Mary Kerridge, Joan Sims and Ralph Michael, to the perhaps less familiar faces of Simon Shepherd, Samantha Bond, Nicola King, Paola Dionisotti and Matthew Solon. But most of all there is Miss Hickson, who has relatively few scenes but remains the dominant force throughout. Her Miss Marple is a treasure and, as usual, strikingly astute as she observes how the English village has changed. It may still look simple, peaceful and eternal, but today it is battered by people arriving from anywhere with no biographies. Everybody used to know one another, she says, now there are no letters of introduction, no roots. If you haven't guessed, Miss Marple is offering a clue to this mystery's solution. TV WEEKEND
