366|1987\01\02|BACKER OF FRENCH YACHT FINDS NO BOON IN RACING|Serge Crasnianski, a French businessman who has invested $10 million in French Kiss' effort to win the America's Cup, has found it a sobering experience.|Serge Crasnianski, a French businessman who has invested $10 million in French Kiss' effort to win the America's Cup, has found it a sobering experience. Serge Crasnianski, a French businessman who has invested $10 million in French Kiss' effort to win the America's Cup, has found it a sobering experience. Instead of increasing sales for KIS France, his multimillion-dollar company, the association with the America's Cup appears to have eaten away profits. The 44-year-old Crasnianski has estimated that the venture may have cost the company as much as $70 million in lost revenue. Crasnianski feels that KIS's affiliation with a rich man's pastime, as with many in America's Cup racing, has opened his company to what he considers unwarranted criticism. Crasnianski first realized the ramification of the criticism at a new products show in Paris in November 1985. Asking Why ''Afterward, we had a little reaction,'' he said during a recent interview. ''People were saying, 'Why does this company spend this kind of money on a boat - a huge amount of money - when there is unemployment in the country? Why does he spend money on this kind of advertising and not for jobs? ' '' Critics started picking at the company veneer, dissecting its inner workings and rousing those who were dissatisfied with KIS products. ''The last 10 months have been a real nightmare with the cup,'' Crasnianski said. ''When you get this kind of problem, you go down, down, down until there is no place left to go. And then when you have said everything there is to say, then you begin to go up again. It is getting better now. We are in control.'' It all began three years ago when Crasnianski was faced with finding a way to promote his company. He had started the firm 23 years ago with the production of a machine that reproduced keys within minutes. Mini-Lab Success KIS, which stands for Key Independent System, went bigtime in 1981 when Crasnianski introduced instant photo development. His mini-labs, which were able to process film in less than an hour, cornered 60 percent of the world photo development market. When the Japanese started moving into the market two years later, Crasnianski decided the time was right to develop an image for his company. ''We thought about racing cars, football, bicycling and sailing,'' Crasnianski said. ''Our advertising company said that it was one of the biggest moments in history for the America's Cup. The Americans had just lost the Cup, and they told us that in the next three years, it would be very big.'' Crasnianski is a skier who built his company headquarters in the mountains of Grenoble, France. He was reluctant at first to tie himself to sailing, especially since he knew little about the sport. Once he thought about it, the idea seemed right. With a projected budget of $15 million, part of which was being underwritten by the French Government, Crasnianski saw it as a worthwhile business deal. He did not have the money to compete with the advertising budgets of photo companies such as Fuji or Kodak, but he saw the America's Cup as producing worthwhile results. ''With the America's Cup, I thought perhaps it was a good thing,'' Crasnianski said. ''With a good boat and a good skipper, it might be worth more than 100 million francs with television and with the press. When we started, we thought sailing was a good image for the company.'' Immense Exposure He concedes that, in some respects, the dividend has paid off. His 12-Meter French Kiss has made it to the semifinals and the exposure in the last year has been immense. But he said the negative spill-off is offsetting any gain. ''It has not affected our business with our old customers,'' Crasnianski said. ''But it has affected our getting new customers. There are rumors that the company is not stable, or will not be stable in the future. Some have cast shadows of doubt on our business.'' Besides a key-making machine and the mini-labs, Crasnianski's company produces a color copier. He has recently introduced a new instant blood analyzer and an automatic cookie machine. He says he is confident that those parts of the business will support the slump on the main product side - photo development. A recent article in the international edition of Business Week has charged that Crasnianski has misrepresented costs and profits. The article alleges that KIS France has been involved in unsavory business dealings to promote itself. Crasnianski has denied these allegations, maintaining that they are part of a smear campaign by competitors to undercut his products. They have used the America's Cup, he says, as a means to that end. Nearing Elimination The row appears far from over. But not so with Crasnianski's ties to the America's Cup. French Kiss has lost her last three races to New Zealand and if she loses again, she will be eliminated. Were it not for a recent meeting with Dennis Conner, Crasnianski could be considered out altogether. But there is a new possibility that appears to intrigue him. Conner, whose Stars & Stripes will almost surely face New Zealand in the challenger's final, has asked Crasnianski for future support. Crasnianski has not said yes, but neither has he said no. Tom Whidden, a close friend of Conner who sails as tactician on Stars & Stripes, has confirmed that the two have met. Whidden also has voiced syndicate concern about finding more money. ''You get to the end, and you start wishing you had more,'' Whidden said. ''Your wishes start growing as the competition gets close.''  AMERICA'S CUP
