367|1987\01\02|STUDENTS IN BEIJING, DEFYING POLICE WARNINGS, STAGE A MASS PROTEST|Thousands of college students, defying a Government ban, converged on the central square here on New Year's Day in a demonstration for democracy.|Thousands of college students, defying a Government ban, converged on the central square here on New Year's Day in a demonstration for democracy. Thousands of college students, defying a Government ban, converged on the central square here on New Year's Day in a demonstration for democracy. Groups of demonstrators remained in Tian An Men Square through the night after what had been the largest public protest since the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976. The students dispersed peacefully about 4 A.M. The protests had begun Thursday morning, when students singing the ''Internationale,'' the Communist hymn, started surging across the square through a thin police line before being repulsed. In the afternoon, another cordon of students swept toward City Hall, then reversed direction and, a few banners flying, tried to enter the square before being halted by the police. At least a dozen arrests were made, with some young people bodily carried by their arms and legs onto waiting police vans. ''Long live freedom!'' the students chanted. ''Long live democracy!'' came a return roar. Welded by Spirit of Protest The demonstration, held together less by organization than by a spirit of protest, came despite threats of punishment. A week ago the Beijing police had said that no protests could be held in Tian An Men Square. Despite the warning, wall posters on college campuses called for a demonstration on New Year's Day. As the week wore on, activity on the campuses, clustered mainly in the far northwest corner of the city, sputtered and appeared to die except for occasional political posters. Editorials in newspapers and statements from Government officials accused students of illegal behavior and of undermining stability. As each day passed, the admonitions intensified. But on New Year's Day, students began entering the square singly, in pairs and in small groups. Dressed in thick blue or green cotton padded coats in the subfreezing temperature, they rambled across the vast expanse to huddle in clusters, then dissolving into moving rivers of people. Pavement Was Iced Down Across a broad boulevard from the Forbidden City, a thin police line blocked off most of the square, confining the swirls of students and onlookers to a narrow strip of pavement that had been iced down earlier. Inside the square, 200 members of the Young Pioneers, the children's organization, ringed the 120-foot-high gray Heroes' Monument decorated with friezes of revolutionary scenes. Huge red banners flapped from atop the columned Great Hall of the People on the west side of the square. Shortly after 10 A.M., a line of police, backed by blue-and-white jeeps, started to push the crowd on the northern edge of the square toward the east. Policemen with cameras stood atop the jeeps filming faces in the crowd. ''It is a way of crowd control,'' a young woman student said later. As people were being compressed into an increasingly smaller area, a dense knot of people suddenly burst through the police cordon and moved toward the Monument to the People's Heroes. The fragmented line of police tried to regroup, the green-uniformed men in long fur-colored great coats scrambling to hem in the spreading wave of people. Cries of 'No Arrests' At one point, a few policemen wedged into the turmoil and tried to drag a man out. Cries of ''No arrests, no arrests!'' broke out as the man was hustled off. Swirling, turning this way and that, the crowd compacted into a knot that wove across the square, blocked by the police, but then popping through a lightly manned edge. Then, as if on cue, the knot of people, mostly Beijing University students, began the rhythmic, tempestuous chords of the ''Internationale,'' the revolutionary anthem written by Eugene Pottier in 1871, about the time of the Paris Commune, with music by Pierre Degeyter. Again, a phalanx of police charged into the singing mass and half-dragged, half-carried another young man into an splotch of empty square. By then no more than 400 students pressed forward, propelled by an almost independent momentum of the packed mass of bodies, until they reached the steps of the monument. Abruptly, they stopped. Hurriedly, the police mustered in front of them. The last words of the ''Internationale'' hung in the air and the clot of protesters swiveled to rejoin the thousands of students and onlookers that lined the street edging the square. As they moved across the square, a surge of students moved down a sidewalk on its eastern border, again singing and chanting. Reinforcements of police double-timed down the broad steps of the Museum of History and the Museum of the Revolution and quickly lined the sidewalk, shoving students and onlookers alike off the street. Roars of Disapproval Another person was grabbed from the crowd by the police, provoking roars of dissaproval. But the crowd pressed on, toward the museum steps. Then, where just an instant before a wave of protesters pushed forward, the sidewalk was jammed with young students and sightseers milling about. Across the street, the empty square was fringed with a green line of police. ''Why are we here?'' a young woman said. ''We are here for democracy.'' What, she was asked, did that mean to her? ''Democracy,'' she replied, ''is the public election of our leaders. I responded to the call of the Beijing University students. I am not afraid.'' A young man said he was not sure what was going on. ''It is not clear,'' he said. ''I came to see what was happening. I am not afraid. We are protected by the law.'' By noon, 2,000 students had formed into a group and began moving eastward toward City Hall. Banners, some on cloth, others on white perforated computer paper, were unfurled, reading ''Support Deng Xiaoping and the Four Modernizations,'' and ''Oppose conservatives and reactionaries.'' The crowd spun around and rushed back toward the square, battering against several hundred policemen. At this point, half a dozen students were arrested. Although foreign journalists could verify only about 10 arrests during the turmoil, Beijing University students maintained they had the names, departments and class years of 24 students who they said had been arrested. By 9 P.M., about 2,000 students had gathered outside the home of Ding Shisun, the president of Beijing University, demanding the release of the students, a promise of no reprisals against demonstrators and the reporting of the demonstration in the press. Mr. Ding said through a megaphone that he would reply within two hours. Part of the crowd drained away from the house and began marching toward the city center. After two hours, Mr. Ding emerged from his house and told a crowd of several hundred students who had remained that the detainees were being released and that he was sending cars to pick them up. ''If you don't believe me, get a new president,'' he said. Meanwhile, the number of marchers began to swell as they left the campus and headed toward People's University. There, as many as a thousand students joined the march. News of Students' Release After about two miles, when the students had reached the entrance of the Friendship Hotel, they were told by a university official that the detainees had been released. Cheers rang out, but still the crowd continued to move south for another two miles before being halted by a double phalanx of police. Uncertain what to do next, students began to mill about. At the university, about 2,000 students cheered as the 11 released detainees were driven through the gates. They were hoisted on shoulders of their classmates. One of the students said six policemen had dragged him on the ground when he was seized. Another said he had been struck in the face. Others said they had been kept in a police station all day without food.
