368|1987\01\02|KOCH SELECTS EX-PROSECUTOR AS LEGAL AIDE|Mayor Koch has selected a former chief assistant in the Manhattan District Attorney's office to fill the critical position of Corporation Counsel, according to administration officials.|Mayor Koch has selected a former chief assistant in the Manhattan District Attorney's office to fill the critical position of Corporation Counsel, according to administration officials. Mayor Koch has selected a former chief assistant in the Manhattan District Attorney's office to fill the critical position of Corporation Counsel, according to administration officials. He is Peter L. Zimroth, now a partner with the law firm of Kostelanetz & Ritholz. He will succeed Frederick A. O. Schwarz Jr., who is returning to private practice the middle of this month after five years as the city's chief lawyer. Mr. Zimroth will be the third person to serve as Corporation Counsel since Mr. Koch took office in 1978, and could, if his pattern follows that of his predecessors, become one of the Mayor's closest advisers on matters of policy as well as of law. The job of corporation counsel has long been one of the most sensitive and powerful in the city, and that is especially true now because of the corruption scandal. Mr. Schwarz has acted not only as the city's top lawyer but also as a key adviser to Mr. Koch. He has proposed policy changes in reaction to the scandal, come up with methods of reforming practices that came under attack and participated in a number of difficult news conferences. Recommended by an Aide The Mayor's first Corporation Counsel, Allen G. Schwartz, was also a top adviser. He, Mr. Schwarz and Patrick F. X. Mulhearn, the Mayor's counsel, proposed and screened candidates for the job. According to mayoral advisers, it was one of Mr. Koch's aides who recommended Mr. Zimroth. Mr. Koch interviewed more than five lawyers for the $94,500-a-year job, including some who declined on the ground that taking it would represent a financial sacrifice, administration officials said. The Mayor had, some weeks ago, tried to persuade Richard Beattie, a lawyer who serves on the Board of Education - a part-time job - to be the Corporation Counsel, but he indicated he would prefer staying in private practice. The office Mr. Zimroth will take over some time next month is, city officials believe, the largest government law office in the country, except for the United States Justice Department. It has more than 500 lawyers and handles all of the city's legal work, ranging from small claims cases to litigation before the United States Supreme Court. Mr. Zimroth, who will be 44 years old on Jan. 11, joined his law firm in 1980. He was with the Manhattan District Attorney's office from 1975 to 1980, first as chief of the appeals bureau and then as chief assistant district attorney. Before that, he was an assistant United States attorney in the Southern District of New York and taught at New York University's law school. The Brooklyn-born lawyer is married to Estelle Parsons, the actress, and they have one son, Abraham, who will be four years old next month. The family lives on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
