371|1987\01\02|NEW YORK SURVIVORS HAPPY TO BE HOME SAFE|Survivors of the Dupont Plaza hotel disaster from the New York area told harrowing stories of the fatal fire yesterday, and telephone lines were jammed by anxious callers seeking to learn the fate of family and friends in Puerto Rico.|Survivors of the Dupont Plaza hotel disaster from the New York area told harrowing stories of the fatal fire yesterday, and telephone lines were jammed by anxious callers seeking to learn the fate of family and friends in Puerto Rico. Survivors of the Dupont Plaza hotel disaster from the New York area told harrowing stories of the fatal fire yesterday, and telephone lines were jammed by anxious callers seeking to learn the fate of family and friends in Puerto Rico. ''It was like a war zone,'' said Arthur Halpern of Staten Island, who was on his 18th vacation at the Dupont, with his wife, Bernice, and their sons, Douglas and Michael. Mr. Halpern's life was saved because his wife, Bernice, and a friend, Martin E. Madoff, were at poolside, where they heard the explosion. Mr. Madoff immediately telephoned Mr. Halpern's room and told him to get out. The passenger elevators were inoperable, and what followed was a frantic flight down stairs only to find a chaotic, smoke-filled lobby. Mr. Halpern said he retreated to a hallway and forced his way onto a service elevator being run by two employees, only to be blocked by more smoke on the next floor. Finally, one employee abandoned the elevator and darted through the smoke and carnage to safety, with Mr. Halpern on his heels. ''I'm so happy to be alive,' Mr. Halpern said last night from home. Emergency information centers were set up by the Red Cross, and the telephone lines were frequently busy as hundreds of calls came in from the States and Europe. New Jersey Coach Calls Home One of the first calls back home came from Christopher J. Donfield, the basketball coach for Bergen Catholic High School of Oradell, N.J. A school contingent of 20 had gone to San Juan to see the team compete in a tournament. Only half an hour after the initial explosion, Mr. Donfield's mother, Helen, got a call at home in Teaneck, N.J. ''One of the other mothers called and said don't get upset, but there's been a big fire,'' she said. ''Right after that, my son called and said they were all fine, except they were still in their bathing suits. I didn't realize it was so terrible till I saw the news on TV.'' To allay fears, Mrs. Donfield said her son ''made all the boys call their parents to tell them they were all right.'' The basketball team, which won the two games it played, is to return tonight. Survivors were shaken. As he escaped, Mr. Halpern said he saw ''many badly hurt people, blood all over some people, and people begging to be taken to the hospital, people being carried off on beach lounges.'' 'It Was a Tearful Scene' Once he was safe, he said, ''my next thought was my wife and children.'' The sons had gone outside to take photographs, ''which probably saved them.'' ''A friend spotted me,'' he recounted, ''and yelled to my wife: 'Arthur's here!' She and my sons practically collapsed. They were afraid they'd never see me again. We embraced. It was a very tearful scene.'' Mr. Halpern returned to New York in the evening with one son, but said his wife and other son stayed behind ''in hope of going back to hotel to retrieve our belongings.'' ''There were a lot of sentimental things - jewelry,'' Mr. Halpern said. Mr. Halpern, 59 years old, an insurance broker and accountant, said he doubted they would ever see their belongings again. While many families were reunited, other survivors were left not knowing the fate of their relatives. Judy Cohen, 40, of Hamden, Conn., said her husband, Al, 56, was missing. ''I know he was in the casino,'' she said, adding that she last saw him in the casino when she stopped to tell him she was going to a beauty parlor. The casino was where many victims were trapped, and some bodies were not immediately identifiable. The Cohens were part of a group of friends on a New Year's trip to Puerto Rico. John Benevento, a Woodbridge, Conn., contractor, told The Associated Press, ''There were 30 of us, and seven are missing.''
