372|1987\01\02|A Day of Change For a Wunderkind|When the top man loses on the first Tuesday of November, the county courthouse has a mighty lonely feel on Dec. 31. ''After tomorrow, who knows what?'' said Joan Doll, the secretary to the outgoing Essex County Executive, Democrat Peter Shapiro.|When the top man loses on the first Tuesday of November, the county courthouse has a mighty lonely feel on Dec. 31. ''After tomorrow, who knows what?'' said Joan Doll, the secretary to the outgoing Essex County Executive, Democrat Peter Shapiro. When the top man loses on the first Tuesday of November, the county courthouse has a mighty lonely feel on Dec. 31. ''After tomorrow, who knows what?'' said Joan Doll, the secretary to the outgoing Essex County Executive, Democrat Peter Shapiro. In Essex, they play politics spikes up, and some of Mr. Shapiro's aides ran to the bank Wednesday as soon as they got their final check, fearful payment would be stopped by the new Republican administration. Dozens of Mr. Shapiro's managers got New Year's Eve calls telling them not to come in Friday. ''You were fired too?'' Mr. Shapiro said to a mid-level manager who came to say good-bye. ''I don't believe this.'' Mr. Shapiro may have been the best known county executive in America. Newsweek called him ''Prince of the Suburbs,'' and reporters doing profiles of Mr. Shapiro routinely stuck in a ''Wunderkind.'' A Harvard graduate, at 23 he was elected to the State Assembly, and promptly set the freshman record for sponsoring most bills that were passed into law. At 26 he beat the Democratic machine to be elected executive of Essex. He was a model for liberal Democrats trying to survive in the 1980's, for he talked of both social justice and fiscal constraint. Through attrition, mainly, he cut county jobs to 6,500 from 8,300. When he came into office, 4 percent of the managers were members of minority groups in a county that is 40 percent minority; now 36 percent are. Two percent were women; now 46 percent are. He was seen as a prototypical new model leader, often carrying software home at the end of the day to finish projects on his home computer. On his last day in office Wednesday he unplugged the computer and took down the political cartoons from the wall. One showed Mr. Shapiro with a broom, sweeping away patronage. In another he was trying on the shoes of clean government. Mr. Shapiro spent part of the day on the phone to people like Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, trying to find jobs for his aides. There was so little time, he took care of details himself. ''What's your address?'' he asked the Governor. A stickler, he sometimes drove people around him nuts. On the final afternoon, he had his secretary retype the Dukakis letter. ''I never call him Michael,'' he said. ''I call him Mike.'' If there were emotional cracks in Mr. Shapiro, they didn't show. ''I'm not a stress kind of person,'' he said. ''I'm a very strong type. Anybody will tell you this; I've got a pretty tough constitution.'' He said he knew he was in trouble last summer after the Board of Freeholders - with whom Mr. Shapiro had been warring - passed a 22 percent tax increase. ''I was the only high county official running for office,'' he said. ''People blamed me.'' In early September he met with his pollster, Paul Maslin. How big a problem is the tax increase? Mr. Shapiro asked. ''It's real big,'' said Mr. Maslin. ''The psychological thing came through,'' Mr. Shapiro said, ''and I said, 'God, this may be it.' '' Back in 1985 - when he had still never lost an election - a reporter for The Bergen Record asked Mr. Shapiro about his cockiness. ''It's a spiritual sense,'' Mr. Shapiro replied, ''that there's something beyond that intervenes on my behalf.'' On his final day, he said he still felt that way, it just did not always translate into election victories. He says he does not know what he will do next, though he has had good offers. He says he wants to make more than his $75,000 county salary and will make a job decision by April 1. ''I don't have a lot of savings,'' he said. ''I can't take off for an indefinite period.'' Asked if he would run for governor in 1989 -as he did in 1985 - he said, ''No, I doubt that, I really severely doubt that,'' and then added, ''I don't want to close the door to anything.'' Asked if he had plans for his first day off, he said, ''Want me to check?'' and called up his schedule on the computer. ''Nothing scheduled,'' he said. It was after 5 by the time he said good-bye to everyone and cleaned out his office. In the end, it came down to eight boxes of mementos loaded onto two dollies. The Hall of Records was quiet as he waited for the elevator. ''This elevator used to be run manually,'' Mr. Shapiro said, ''a patronage job. I converted them all to automatic.'' A cleaning man helped Mr. Shapiro load his county car, a Chevrolet. Mr. Shapiro had set a policy of county employees using moderate-priced cars. When Sheriff Thomas D'Alessio had tried to get a Buick, it became an issue, and Mr. Shapiro refused to budge unless the sheriff found a Buick for the price of a Chevy. Some have said if Mr. Shapiro had bent more on things like the Chevy principle, he might have been starting his third term, instead of riding home with the boxes. But others said it wasn't Mr. Shapiro's style to do lots of bending. The last one to leave that night was Mr. Shapiro's chief of staff, Ray Codey, who turned out the lights. COLUMN ONE: OUR TOWNS
