373|1987\01\02|SUBWAYS HOLD RESIDUE OF NEW YEAR'S REVELS|It is 4:52 A.M. and someone out there is still blowing a New Year's Eve horn. The squeal ricochets off the subway walls, bounces down the rails and disappears somewhere in the southbound tunnel of the 42d Street station.|It is 4:52 A.M. and someone out there is still blowing a New Year's Eve horn. The squeal ricochets off the subway walls, bounces down the rails and disappears somewhere in the southbound tunnel of the 42d Street station. It is 4:52 A.M. and someone out there is still blowing a New Year's Eve horn. The squeal ricochets off the subway walls, bounces down the rails and disappears somewhere in the southbound tunnel of the 42d Street station. No one on the platform is amused. The 20 or so people are already annoyed by the half-hour wait for the F train. Most of them are also trying to shake off sleep. A few are reeling with the first ache of a hangover. On a nearby bench, a teen-ager with an ashen face sits bent forward, holding his head between his knees. He is sweating Budweiser. The horn keeps blaring. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. ''Oh God,'' he says. ''Make him stop.'' Such scenes were common early yesterday morning in the New York subway - a morning perhaps even more motley and painful than usual because it marked the end of the city's New Year's Eve celebration. As late as 5 A.M., subway cars clanking through Manhattan often were filled to near-rush hour levels. If the revelers had not been wearing red-sequined slippers, or cowboy boots with spurs, or leather chaps, or confetti in their hair, or cardboard tiaras or white top hats or metallic blue fezzes, they could have passed for party-addled New Yorkers on any late weekend night. ''Que pasa? Que pasa?'' yelled 18-year-old Donna Rice of Poughkeepsie as she danced along the edge of the platform at the Times Square station. ''We're looking for action, you know.'' She pulls out her horn.  Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. A few yards away, a girl who could not have been older than 10 was aiming her horn into the receiver of a pay telephone. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. At another part of the station, two grown men seemed to be imitating John Belushi imitating Miles Davis. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. Errrr-raaaa. Not everyone was part of the subterranean symphony that saturates the subway system on the morning after New Year's Eve. There were a few cautious clusters returning home from an evening of dining and dancing. There were the homeless and the panhandlers, too, of course. For the most part, though, the trains were filled with knots of urban ordinariness: the downtown clubsters cantering from bar to bar to bar; the uptown yuppies heading home, and the occasional tourist asking how to get to Grand Central Station and griping about the city. ''I've been in New York before with my buddies, but never on New Year's Eve,'' said Brian Robbins, 28, a construction worker from Cromwell, Conn., on the No. 1 train as it lumbered into Penn Station at 2:05 A.M. ''Never again. Too much retardation. ''I've seen riots, fistfights, people killing each other,'' he added between gulps of beer. ''We couldn't believe it. The ball was coming down and a bottle went by my head and it was like war.'' 'I'm a Rowdy Person' He gulps beer again. ''I'm a rowdy person, you know,'' he said. ''But this is too much for me.'' Like many things in New York City, subway crime is exaggerated to mythical proportions. But there are times when the underlying reality surfaces, particularly in the early morning hours. ''The doors are locked; the doors are locked!'' shouts a husky man with a wild black beard and a green plaid coat riding the F train into Brooklyn. ''I can't get out! You can't get out! No one can get out! I could pull a gun and shoot everyone in here and no one would get out.'' ''Let me out of here,'' he yells. ''I hate this place.'' Threatening a Dumpster The train stops at West Fourth Street. He stumbles out the door. He starts to sing: ''Here we go loop-de-le. Here we go loop-de-li.'' A few hours earlier, at 1:47 A.M., a tall man with a short temper was standing on the southbound platform at 96th Street and threatening a giant green trash can. ''You don't know who I am, do you?'' he told the Dumpster. ''Yeah, you know. Get away, or I'll kill you.'' Leaving Manhattan, the chaos of the first morning of the year seems to dissipate. In Brooklyn, a handful of riders on the train to Coney Island doze sitting up in their seats. At each stop, when the doors open no one comes in, no one goes out. At 5:42 A.M., inside the Carroll Street subway station, all appears calm, the station empty, the tracks quiet. In the distance, though, there is a distant wail cutting through the cold and the night. Someone, somewhere, is blowing a horn.
