375|1987\01\02|SECOND INAUGUAL BY CUOMO SUMS UP ACCOMPLISHMENTS|Fifty-eight days after winning re-election by the largest margin of any governor in New York State history, Mario Matthew Cuomo was inaugurated today for a second term, saying his administration had proved that government could be both compassionate and fiscally responsible.|Fifty-eight days after winning re-election by the largest margin of any governor in New York State history, Mario Matthew Cuomo was inaugurated today for a second term, saying his administration had proved that government could be both compassionate and fiscally responsible. Fifty-eight days after winning re-election by the largest margin of any governor in New York State history, Mario Matthew Cuomo was inaugurated today for a second term, saying his administration had proved that government could be both compassionate and fiscally responsible. ''We proved - together - that the New York idea works,'' Mr. Cuomo said, his 22-minute address interrupted seven times by applause, ''that government can have both a heart and a head, that it can have both common sense and compassion. We proved that we can balance our books without ignoring the reasonable needs of the struggling middle class and poor.''  [ Transcript, page B4. ]  The Governor used the speech mainly to look back at the last four years, citing accomplishments and portraying New York as a model for the rest of the country. References to Washington The address came only a day after Mr. Cuomo said in an interview that he would soon begin a series of trips around the country - a signal to some political strategists that he is on the verge of seeking the 1988 Democratic nomination for President - and his speech was filled with references to the country as a whole and to Washington. ''We can say, as we're being urged to by some in Washington,'' he said, ''that we have stretched our minds and our wills and our resources as far as they will go . . . that we now have to settle for less than we once believed we were capable of, less than was done by our forebears who lifted an entire generation from poverty, defeated Fascism and built this country into the strongest nation in the world.'' ''We have another choice,'' he added. ''We can aim higher.'' Beethoven and Whitman The speech was the centerpiece of a two-hour ceremony before 4,200 guests at the convention center of the Nelson A. Rockefeller Emprire State Plaza, next to the Capitol. The program - interspersed with choral and orchestral pieces that ranged from Beethoven to an ''I Love New York'' medley - included a reading from Walt Whitman's ''A Song for Occupation'' by William Kennedy, the Pulitzer Prize-winning Albany novelist. One by one, three statewide officials - Lieut. Gov. Stan Lundine, Attorney General Robert Abrams and Comptroller Edward V. Regan - took the oath of office. Then at 1:30 P.M., with howitzers outside the hall booming a 19-gun salute, Mr. Cuomo was given the oath for a second term as the state's 52d Governor by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler. The oath was a public re-enactment of the formal swearing-in at a private ceremony 9:15 Wednesday night at the Executive Mansion. 'So Help Me God' Like Mr. Regan - and unlike Mr. Abrams and Mr. Lundine - Mr. Cuomo ended his oath with the words ''so help me God.'' Today's inaugural was tightly controlled by Cuomo aides to focus as much attention as possible on the Governor. The ceremonies were brought to a standstill for five minutes so Mr. Cuomo's entrance would be made after a statewide television hookup was in place. For his swearing-in and speech - but for none of the others - the house lights were dimmed to draw all eyes to the podium. The 54-year-old Governor - in a dark blue suit, white shirt and red and blue striped tie - showed no signs of the back pain, from a pinched nerve, that has plagued him in recent weeks. Sitting next to his wife, Matilda, who wore an off-white dress and jacket, he tapped his toe and clapped his hands in time to the music, frequently waving to individuals in the audience. Among them was Mayor Koch. O'Rourke Declined Invitation Missing from the crowd was Mr. Cuomo's Republican opponent in November, Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, who declined his invitation. Mr. Cuomo's address was filled with the images - and sometimes the exact words - that run through most of his major speeches: Franklin D. Roosevelt, who ''lifted himself from his wheelchair to lift this nation from its knees''; the Governor's immigrant parents; childhood afternoons in Queens spent dreaming of a better life; the Statue of Liberty; ''all the government we need, but only the government we need.'' It contained no new initiatives. In his first inaugural Mr. Cuomo stressed the interdependence of all New Yorkers, pledging to help the poor and other disadvantaged people yet at the same time to be fiscally responsible. The point of the second inaugural, the Governor said, was to show that he had held true to that pledge in his first term and would continue to do so in his second. Pointed to Tax Cut ''Some approved of the words that I used,'' Mr. Cuomo said, referring to the 1983 inaugural, ''but said that four years of actual governance would show them to be unrealistic, perhaps just poetry. But now, four years later, having applied those ideas to the task of serving this wonderful state of nearly 18 million people, I believe it all, even more assuredly and passionately than I did then.'' As evidence that he had held to his pledge, the Governor pointed out that he had enacted a tax cut and balanced the state budget, while increasing welfare payments and shelter and nutrition programs for the poor. In an interview, Mr. Cuomo was asked about the similarity of the themes of his speeches, particularly the two inaugurals. ''We all learn things, of course,'' he said. ''But I started in this business when I was already mature. I didn't begin to form my philosophy with my public life. My philosophy was formed when I began my public life. There's no need to find a new approach, to shift to the left or shift to the right. ''Read Lincoln's second inaugural from 1865. It said, 'I told you in 1861 what I believed.' '' Critical of Federal Deficit In his nationwide references, the Governor was critical of the budget deficit, of the imbalance in trade, of unemployment and of what he sees as a failure to deal with the needs of the poor. But as in the past, Mr. Cuomo, a frequent opponent of Reagan Administration policies, did not propose specific alternatives. That has drawn him criticism over the last year. But the Governor said in the interview that the purpose of an inaugural was to talk of philosophy, not specifics. In the address, he described a country of ''miracles'' in which millions needlessly lived in despair. ''We can see more and more elderly living in fear of destitution and abandonment,'' he said. ''We can hear the eloquent cries of America's religious leaders, including the Catholic bishops most recently, on behalf of the voiceless poor.'' Emotional Ending In an emotional ending, as if talking directly to the Statue of Liberty, he continued: ''Lift your lamp, Lady. Lift it to those you've always welcomed. To the lonely and the friendless, to all the members of the human family the world so often finds it convenient to ignore, to despise, even to persecute. ''Lift it for our brothers and sisters in this country, for the farm families and factory workers who are fighting to hold on to their farms and their jobs and their dignity. ''And lift your lamp, as well, for the fortunate among us,'' he went on a bit later. ''For the well fed, for the well educated, for the satisfied. Don't let us forget who we are and where we came from and what your promise had pledged us to.''
