377|1987\01\02|REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: KUNSTLER 101 CONVENES|The murder trial here of two self-avowed revolutionaries has attracted a high school criminal-justice class that has been studying the defense tactics of the lawyer William M. Kunstler.|The murder trial here of two self-avowed revolutionaries has attracted a high school criminal-justice class that has been studying the defense tactics of the lawyer William M. Kunstler. The murder trial here of two self-avowed revolutionaries has attracted a high school criminal-justice class that has been studying the defense tactics of the lawyer William M. Kunstler. Roger Shutack, the teacher of the class, from Voorhees High School in Glen Gardner, about 20 miles from here in Hunterdon County, said the juniors and seniors had been studying Mr. Kunstler's defense of radicals in this and other cases. One of the cases was the trial of the so-called Chicago 7, who were charged with conspiring to start a riot at the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago. Meeting the students in the hall outside the courtroom, Mr. Kunstler said that the politics of the defendants in this case, Thomas W. Manning and Richard C. Williams, should not matter in the verdict. The defense maintains that Mr. Manning, who Mr. Kunstler represents, killed State Trooper Philip J. Lamonaco in self-defense, and that Mr. Williams was not involved in the shooting, five years ago on Interstate 80. ''They are revolutionaries,'' Mr Kunstler said of the clients. ''They want a different system of government in America. They have strong political feelings. They're anti-government, believe me, in every sense of the word.'' But, he said, ''self-defense is a legitimate defense'' and the only issue is what happened in the brief confrontation at the scene of the shooting. ''Our area is very conservative,'' Mr. Shatuck said later. ''Most of the parents don't like Mr. Kunstler. Many of the kids feel the same. But we're trying to show both sides, keep an open mind and have the students do so too.'' The oft-moved trial of the two revolutionaries will move again when testimony resumes Monday. Mr. Manning and Mr. Williams went on trial for murder at the Somerville Elks Club on Nov. 10. Testimony was then heard in the tiny courtroom of Judge Michael R. Imbriani of Superior Court in an annex of the Somerset County Courthouse until Judge Imbriani moved the trial yesterday to larger quarters in the courthouse across the street, which was built in 1906. With Mr. Manning on the stand that day, the judge borrowed a courtroom empty for the holidays to accommodate the expected crowd. An audience of 200 people, many of whom stood in line for more than an hour to go through metal detectors and get passes to enter, heard the bearded 40-year-old defendant, speaking rapidly in the accent of his native Boston, testify that he killed the trooper in self-defense after first being shot at. But the big courtroom is no longer available to Judge Imbriani, and the trial will return to the annex, where the courtroom seats 24 spectators. With Mr. Manning resuming testimony, some visitors may not get in, even to a second annex courtroom, where proceedings can be watched on closed-circuit television. There may be yet another move. To accommodate audience demand to hear the lawyers' summations, expected about Jan. 12, the judge told the jury the trial may go back to a big meeting room in the Elks Club. ''I'm probably the only judge in the history of New Jersey who ever conducted a trial under a mounted elk's head,'' Judge Imbriani said in an interview. Mr. Williams, also a bearded native of Massachusetts, is not expected to testify. His lawyer, Lynne Stewart, has said he was with other members of the Armed Clandestine Movement when the shooting occurred and does not want to implicate them under cross-examination, because it might subject them to charges of harboring a fugitive. Both Mr. Manning and the only other member of the underground group to testify so far, Raymond Luc Levasseur, refused to answer most questions about the organization, its activities and its members. While warrants had been issued for the arrest of both defendants on other charges at the time of the shooting, the defense avoids the word ''fugitive'' as prejudicial. ''They say fugitivity,'' Mr. Kunstler said of the prosecution during one colloquy. ''We call it clandestinity.'' ''It's a free country,'' said the judge. With no witness to identify Mr. Williams as having been present at the scene of the shooting, the state has offered circumstantial evidence that includes the testimony of 67 witnesses and 449 exhibits. One of the last items to be offered in evidence before the state rested its case was a photograph of the kitchen sink at the Pennsylvania farmhouse Mr. Williams shared with Mr. Manning and his family at the time of the shooting. ''Now they have everything in,'' Ms. Stewart said. Judge Imbriani has delayed a decision on whether one item will be admitted to the jury deliberation room. It is the bullet-riddled uniform jacket of Trooper Lamonaco, displayed on a headless mannequin. ''It would be a brooding presence,'' said Mr. Kunstler, objecting. The prosecutor, Deputy Attorney General Anthony G. Simonetti, drew the court's attention one recent day when he reported contact with one of the women on the unsequestered jury the previous midnight at a motel lounge. The judge sent the rest of the jury out of the room and questioned the woman about the incident. ''We just said hello,'' she said. That satisfied the judge.
