379|1987\01\02|OFFICER SHOT AT TERMINAL OVER SMOKING|An off-duty police officer was shot in the face without warning on a crowded commuter train in Pennsylvania Station early yesterday after asking several youths, who the police said were carrying a gun, switch-blade knives, brass knuckles and crack, not to smoke in a nonsmoking car.|An off-duty police officer was shot in the face without warning on a crowded commuter train in Pennsylvania Station early yesterday after asking several youths, who the police said were carrying a gun, switch-blade knives, brass knuckles and crack, not to smoke in a nonsmoking car. An off-duty police officer was shot in the face without warning on a crowded commuter train in Pennsylvania Station early yesterday after asking several youths, who the police said were carrying a gun, switch-blade knives, brass knuckles and crack, not to smoke in a nonsmoking car. The officer, James P. Delmonico, 28 years old, was listed in satisfactory condition at Bellevue Hospital. He had been returning home to West Islip, L.I., on a Long Island Rail Road train after a 13-hour overtime shift with the mounted patrol at the New Year's Eve celebration in Times Square. The shooting occurred about 6 A.M. on a train bound for Babylon that was crowded with revelers. Station Sealed Off Moments after the shooting, the L.I.R.R. police, with the help of scores of on-duty and off-duty Amtrak and New York City police officers, sealed off the station and conducted a search that led to the arrest of five youths on charges ranging from attempted murder to possession of cocaine. At a news conference yesterday, the Manhattan detective commander, Assistant Chief Anthony M. Voelker, said the dispute broke out when Officer Delmonico told a group of youths not to smoke in a nonsmoking car. After the officer exchanged sharp words with the youths, one of them pulled out a .25-caliber Beretta automatic pistol and shot him once in the face at point-blank range. The bullet entered above his right jaw and exited just below his left ear, the police said. No passengers were hit, and the bullet that struck Officer Delmonico was apparently the only shot fired. Chief Voelker said Officer Delmonico, who has been on the police force since 1983, did not identify himself as a police officer initially, but showed his badge and drew his gun after he was shot. At that point, the youths fled, with Officer Delmonico in pursuit. Chief Voelker said some youths scattered along the platform or to other cars, while others dashed up the stairs to the lobby and into the bustling terminal. With blood streaming from his wounds, Officer Delmonico chased his assailants up the stairs to the lobby, where he collapsed. By that time, police officers were responding to a bulletin over the station's public-address system to assist the wounded officer. Suspects Apprehended Scores of officers sealed off the building and apprehended several suspects in the terminal, on the platform and on the train, in some cases with the assistance of stunned passengers who saw the shooting and were watching the ensuing drama from the platform. Arrested and charged in the shooting were Thomas Berry, 19, who was charged with attempted murder; Kenny Hardy, 19, possession of a gun and of 35 packets of what the police believed to be cocaine and 15 packets of marijuana; Eugene Frederick, 17, possession of a spring-loaded switch-blade; Andrew Henry, 17, and Lavane Beard, 16, both charged with possession of brass knuckles with built-in four-inch switch-blades. All of the youths live in Amityville, L.I., except Mr. Beard, who lives in Wyndanch, L.I. A youth who had been smoking was not arrested. He was not identified. About 200 passengers on the train, which was scheduled to leave Penn Station at 6:10 A.M. and arrive at Babylon at 7:21 A.M., were kept on board for questioning until about 10 A.M. The incident yesterday was the first shooting at Penn Station since February 1984, when a sniper shot and killed an Amtrak engineer as he walked along the platform between Tracks 20 and 21, the same area where yesterday's shooting occurred.
