380|1987\01\02|TO SOME, DAVIS IS 'HERO' AMID ATTACKS ON BLACKS|As Larry Davis was led away from a Bronx housing project in manacles Dec. 7, dozens of tenants leaned out their windows to chant ''Lar-ry! Lar-ry!,'' cheering the man accused of wounding six police officers the way they might a boxer stepping into the ring.|As Larry Davis was led away from a Bronx housing project in manacles Dec. 7, dozens of tenants leaned out their windows to chant ''Lar-ry! Lar-ry!,'' cheering the man accused of wounding six police officers the way they might a boxer stepping into the ring. As Larry Davis was led away from a Bronx housing project in manacles Dec. 7, dozens of tenants leaned out their windows to chant ''Lar-ry! Lar-ry!,'' cheering the man accused of wounding six police officers the way they might a boxer stepping into the ring. Now, four weeks later, those exhortations have proven to be more than an initial, spontaneous reaction. Representatives from various segments of the black community say that Mr. Davis is regarded as, if not a folk hero for his violent actions and success in evading a massive manhunt for 17 days, at least an embodiment of their festering frustration with the police. Like the recent beatings of three blacks by a gang of whites in Howard Beach, Queens, say even those black leaders who disdain Mr. Davis, the reaction to his arrest has discomfitingly drawn attention to the state of race relations in New York City. In talking about Mr. Davis during interviews and in forums ranging from radio talk shows to private conversations, many blacks mention not only the Howard Beach incident but also the Bernhard H. Goetz case and the killings by the police of Eleanor Bumpurs and the death of Michael Stewart. Police Assailed on Crime And though many blacks assail the police for being unduly harsh, they also criticize them for not cracking down harshly enough on the pervasive street crime in poor neighborhoods. Either way, it can spell hostility and even a desire for vengeance. ''It should've been expected that the things Larry Davis did would make him a folk hero,'' said Claude Brown, the author of ''Manchild in the Promised Land,'' an autobiographical account of his upbringing in Harlem. ''The white police department has been intimidating the black community -think of Eleanor Bumpurs and Michael Stewart - and all of a sudden here comes Larry Davis the avenging angel. It's like, 'We finally won one.' '' As Mr. Brown's comments suggest, the support for Mr. Davis, or what he is believed to symbolize, does not come only from the poorest blacks. Rather, it seems to cut across lines of class. ''The overwhelming response for Davis is positive,'' said Gary Byrd, the host of a daily talk show on the radio station WLIB, which has a large black audience. ''And I'm hearing that from thoughtful, rational kinds of people. Even those with reservations speak with understanding. People would say, 'I don't agree with shooting people, but he did take care of himself.' '' Respect in Black Community L L Cool J, a best-selling rap musician, said he has heard similar comments in Hollis, Queens, the black middle-class neighborhood where he lives. ''Incredibly enough, a lot of people respect him,'' he said. ''He did something brave. Whether it was right or wrong doesn't matter to a lot of people. They looked at Larry Davis and said, 'That guy's bad.' Like Tony Dorsett or something. Personally, I don't support what he did, but I'm telling you what's passed my ears.'' Many blacks, to be sure, abhor Mr. Davis's actions. ''Our students were saying, 'This guy is crazy,' '' said Jimmie Warren, of Taft High School in the Bronx. ''There was not a sense of his bravado, but a sense of disbelief.'' Matthew Kaye, a gypsy-cab driver who lives two blocks from the housing project where Mr. Davis was caught, said: ''I call him an enemy of society. Because anybody involved against a law-enforcement agent should be prosecuted and punished. And he's been committing a lot of crimes.'' Yet any support for Mr. Davis is more striking precisely because of the criminal record he had before his shoot-out with the police Nov. 19. Even if that act was perceived in some quarters as heroic resistance to the authorities, it was preceded by arrests for attempted murder, assault, grand larceny, petty larceny and possession of a hypodermic instrument. Davis Held in Slayings The police officers whom Mr. Davis shot had come to arrest him for the murders of four suspected drug dealers - killings the police have said were not vigilante attempts to drive narcotics out of the neighborhood but were made solely to steal the illicit profits. Immediately after Mr. Davis shot the arresting officers, a small network of friends and relatives willing to help him began to build, along with a kind of cult status. Mr. Davis was able to dodge a 150-officer manhunt for 17 days, earning the street sobriquet ''the dude that elude.'' He was captured only after the initial reward money of $15,000 was raised to $25,000, and an estranged brother-in-law came forward with information about Mr. Davis's whereabouts. (The police say the reward cannot be claimed until Mr. Davis is convicted, and that, even then, they will not release the name of the recipient for fear he might be harmed.) Negotiated Terms of Arrest Most important to many blacks, Mr. Davis negotiated the terms of his arrest so that he was taken alive, with reporters and camera crews on hand. ''When I was growing up,'' Mr. Brown, the author, said, ''if someone shot a cop they got killed in prison. If they ever got to prison.'' The adulation of a violent criminal such as Mr. Davis begins with the American national character, criminologists say, and is heightened by the subculture of the black ghetto. The final step in the process, some blacks in New York say, is the specific ill will between the police and the black community in the city. ''In American history, there has always been a romanticism about the gunman, going back down to Billy the Kid, Jesse James, Bonnie and Clyde,'' said Marvin E. Wolfgang, a professor of criminology and law at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. ''There's something involved in the wishes, desires, fantasies that people can't express directly but can vicariously through other people or fictional characters.'' In his scholarship, Professor Wolfgang has identified America's black ghettos as one of several ''cultural pockets'' in which ''the ready resort to physical violence is not only tolerated but encouraged - and in some situations even required.'' His other examples included Sicilian, Sardinian and Colombian societies. Many residents of American black ghettos, Professor Wolfgang said, share the national aspiration for status and material comfort, but feel unable to reach them through conventional routes because of discrimination and diminished opportunities. Violent behavior is an attempt to get the goods through other means, means that can become the subculture's norms, he said. 'People Respect Strength' Professor Wolfgang's conclusion is consistent with much of the reaction to Mr. Davis. ''People respect strength, respect guts,'' L L Cool J said. ''It's like power rules.'' Claude Brown made a similar point in writing about Harlem three years ago in The New York Times magazine: ''Prison, and doing 'bits' (time), has strangely ambivalent, perhaps even pervertedly romanticized appeal to poor black teen-agers. It is viewed as an inevitability, or at least a probability, accompanied by nothing more than the mild apprehension or anxiety that attends, for instance, a bar mitzvah, joining the Marines or any other manhood initiation ritual in any normal society. One goes into the Marines as a young boy and comes out a 'real man.' It is the same with going into the 'joint,' as prison is called.'' The Davis incident also occurred within a specific context - a series of fatal encounters between the police and blacks that became the flashpoints for their relations. In 1983, Michael Stewart was arrested on charges of painting graffiti in the Union Square subway station. Within an hour, he was taken to Bellevue Hospital with various injuries, of which he died 13 days later. The police officers who arrested Mr. Stewart were acquitted by a jury of any wrongdoing in his death. One year after the Stewart case, a police officer armed with a shotgun killed Eleanor Bumpurs, a Bronx woman being evicted from her apartment. Mrs. Bumpurs, the police said, was threatening the officers with a kitchen knife. The case has yet to go to trial. Similar Status for Goetz Although it did not involve the police, the Goetz case also figured into several observers's comments about Mr. Davis. In late 1984, Mr. Goetz shot four black men who he said were preparing to rob him on a subway. Like Mr. Davis, he attained a kind of folk hero status - the one man who stood up to street crime. ''All these cases have impacted on the community,'' Mr. Byrd of WLIB said. ''And with Larry Davis, it was almost another classic example of black people being victimized by the police. But Davis was able to survive.'' A middle-aged woman who lives in the housing project where Mr. Davis was arrested, and who asked not to be identified by name, said: ''Maybe people liked Larry Davis because we're black and we've seen and heard the things cops do to people with their guns and their authority. I don't justify what he did. But I did pray for him. He didn't kill any of those cops, and he was just protecting himself.'' But there is also a second side to the relationship between inner-city blacks and the police. ''The reason black people feel the police are the enemy is because of the service they get,'' said Detective Roger Abel, president of the Guardians Association, an organization of 2,000 black police officers in New York City. ''You go to a place like 124th and Lenox or 118th and 8th, and you see prostitutes and junkies hanging around. You don't get that on Park Avenue or in Riverdale. And there's no way you can tell me the police can't get those people off the street.'' The criminal charges against Mr. Davis stemming from the shoot-out remain to be adjudicated. But in the meantime, the reaction to him in parts of the black community has created its own tensions - ones that many blacks say have only been heightened by the racial attack in Howard Beach. ''There is a very definite militancy developing,'' Mr. Byrd, the radio host, said. ''It has not been this way since the 60's.''
