383|1987\01\02|U.S. TRIMS CHIP PRICES OF JAPANESE|For the second quarter in a row, the Commerce Department has lowered the minimum prices at which Japanese manufacturers can sell their computer chips in the United States, according to analysts and industry sources.|For the second quarter in a row, the Commerce Department has lowered the minimum prices at which Japanese manufacturers can sell their computer chips in the United States, according to analysts and industry sources. For the second quarter in a row, the Commerce Department has lowered the minimum prices at which Japanese manufacturers can sell their computer chips in the United States, according to analysts and industry sources. The changes make the Japanese more competitive at a time when American producers still accuse them of unfair trade practices. The American industry has begun to climb back after a long slump. The price reductions, while not as sharp as those at the end of September, range from 8.3 percent on Eproms, or erasable programmable read-only memory chips, to 40.9 percent on one megabit chips. They took effect yesterday. The ''fair market'' prices were established under a trade agreement between the United States and Japan that was intended to prevent the Japanese from dumping - selling chips below cost. Initial Prices High When the agreement went into effect in July, the Commerce Department set prices artificially high because it did not have complete information on Japanese production costs, analysts said. As the Japanese provided information on their costs and also began producing more chips, the prices started to decline. The prices are not made public by the Commerce Department. The Japanese Government is notified of the prices and passes the information on to Japanese manufacturers. Industry sources said the department had lowered the minimum prices for 256K D-RAM's, or dynamic random access memory chips, by 50 cents, to $2.50. The average minimum price for Eproms was lowered 50 cents, to $5.50. The largest decline in prices was for the one megabit chip, which has four times the memory density of the 256K D-RAM. Its price was set at $13, down 40.9 percent, from $22 last quarter, the sources said. Previous Reduction of 50% In October, according to industry sources, the prices set for the last three months of 1986 were reduced by about 50 percent from those set in July. Japanese companies can sell their chips at or above the fair market value. United States makers can sell their chips at any price. Despite the agreement, American chip makers have charged that the Japanese are continuing to dump chips in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and in other developing economies, where major semiconductor customers can buy them at substantially lower prices. Many analysts view such dumping and plummeting fair market values as evidence that the semiconductor agreement - which was supposed to eliminate dumping and eventually raise prices - has been a failure. ''The agreement, the whole context of protecting the industry, has been a farce because it's almost impossible to implement and monitor it,'' said Richard Whittington, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. The problem, analysts said, is that there are too many opportunities to circumvent the agreement. Many Japanese companies have established trading companies or stand-alone operations in emerging countries that can buy chips at the cheaper home prices and resell them, they added. Industry sources speak of what they call ''the Korean shell game.'' They say Japanese companies sell chips to Korean companies at fair-market-value prices, then offer a rebate equal to the difference between the official and home price. ''Legally it looks like the chip is going out at a higher price,'' Mr. Whittington said. As a result, many electronics companies in the United States have moved their manufacturing operations overseas to take advantage of lower chip prices, labor costs and taxes. 'Significant Difficulties' While acknowledging ''significant difficulties in the agreement,'' Roger Bolton, a spokesman for the United States Trade Representative, said it was premature to term the agreement a failure. ''We have effectively prevented dumping in the United States and prices are higher than they were before the agreement,'' he said. Sheridan Tatsuno, an analyst for Data Quest, a technology research firm in San Jose, Calif., agreed with Mr. Bolton, noting the price of computer chips would be significantly lower had the agreement not gone into effect, because of the recession in the industry and the new capacity from Korea companies. Mr. Bolton said the Trade Representative had achieved a commitment from the Japanese Government to prevent some of the dumping in developing nations. He said and the two Governments would hold discussions on the matter in Tokyo later this month.
