385|1987\01\02|STOCK STRENGTH PREDICTED...WITH HEAVY BOND DEMAND|With bond yields falling to their lowest level in about nine years, corporate treasurers displayed an awesome appetite for borrowing in 1986. More than $200 billion of new bonds were issued, twice the record set in 1985.|With bond yields falling to their lowest level in about nine years, corporate treasurers displayed an awesome appetite for borrowing in 1986. More than $200 billion of new bonds were issued, twice the record set in 1985. With bond yields falling to their lowest level in about nine years, corporate treasurers displayed an awesome appetite for borrowing in 1986. More than $200 billion of new bonds were issued, twice the record set in 1985. And with bond rates expected to remain at those low levels, investment bankers predict that corporations will continue to flock - although in smaller numbers - to the market. Although many analysts forecast lower rates for early 1987, they acknowledge that the drop should not be as precipitous as the 2-percentage-point decline early last year, and some warn that rates might rise modestly late in 1987. Even so, securities dealers say that the catalysts for new corporate bond sales will be the same as last year: Corporate treasurers and local government officials remain eager to refinance bonds that were sold when interest rates were higher, and Wall Street financiers are still looking to the bond market as a key source of financing for mergers, acquisitions and corporate restructurings. Analysts at Salomon Brothers estimate that new corporate bond issues, after subtracting bonds that are refinanced, might total about $84 billion in 1987, down slightly from the record $90.9 billion in 1986. A Record in 'Junk Bonds' Apart from the activity stimulated by lower interest rates, a record $32.5 billion of high-yield ''junk bond'' financing was arranged last year. Although other Wall Street firms are devoting more resources to arranging sales of these speculative bond issues, Drexel Burnham Lambert continues to dominate the market. But even though Drexel's dominance of the junk bond market has elevated the firm into the ranks of the top 10 underwriters, its other underwriting activities fall short of the industry leaders. The First Boston Corporation, combined with Credit Suisse First Boston, its international affiliate, continues as the leading underwriter of debt securities, followed by Salomon Brothers, which is the largest firm in the American debt market. The growth of the market for high-yield, low-quality bonds has gone hand in hand with investors' growing appetite for such issues. Although some analysts, such as Edward Altman, a New York University professor, warn that a recession could ''cause higher rates of default than anything we have seen in the past,'' such warnings have not discouraged purchases of junk bonds by large investors. Those mutual funds and insurance companies are eager to continue earning the double-digit rates of the early 1980's, and for now, they seem satisfied that interest rates of 13 percent and more on junk bonds are high enough to compensate for the risk of default and the fact that junk bond prices do not rise as much as Treasury bonds when interest rates are falling. Of course, with yields of high- and medium-quality bonds at about their lowest levels in nine years, traditional bond financings to repay short-term debt or raise funds for expansion will continue. A few hundred of the nation's largest corporations have already filed shelf registration statements for more than $150 billion of securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission, thereby clearing the way for a quick sale whenever market conditions are auspicious. ''The absolute level of rates was attractive last year,'' said Donald S. Howard, chief financial officer at Citicorp. That institution borrowed in the domestic long-term debt market last year - with two issues totaling $400 million - for the first time since 1980. Although acknowledging that the low interest rates will continue to tempt corporate treasurers, Mr. Howard noted: ''For the time being, we are like someone who just ate a large meal. Our appetite is reduced.'' Index Watching Will Continue Among investors, one 1986 trend that is sure to continue is the tendency to manage portfolios with the aim of equaling the performance of one of the indexes now compiled by securities dealers. Since only about a fourth of portfolio managers outperform the market, more pension funds and other institutions are directing their fund managers to match an index, rather than trying to outperform the market by guessing which way interest rates will move. ''The search now is for securities that will outperform the various bond market indexes, whether rates rise or fall,'' said H. Dean Benner, a managing director at Chase Investors Management Corporation. The mortgage securities market is one of the most fertile areas for custom-designed securities that meet the needs of investors such as Mr. Benner. After the introduction last year of stripped mortgage-backed securities - where principal and interest payments of outstanding mortgage securities were reallocated among two new securities - and floating rate collateralized mortgage obligations, investors can expect even more diversity in 1987. New Generation of Securities New Federal legislation allowing real estate mortgage investment conduits has cleared the way for a new generation of mortgage-backed securities that were not possible under previous tax laws. Analysts at Salomon Brothers, the leading firm in mortgage-backed securities financing, noted that these real estate conduits will lead to a proliferation of mortgage securities, including some whose credit quality will be far lower than the triple-A level that is now standard in the mortgage market. Elsewhere in the mortgage market, officials at Salomon Brothers said in its ''Prospects for Financial Markets in 1987'' that yields on mortgage pass-through securities - which rose sharply compared with Treasury bonds in 1986 - may decline relative to Treasury issues this year. Prepayments of mortgages should not continue at the same rapid rate as last year, and the supply of new mortgage securities should be reduced as homeowners finish refinancing old, high-interest mortgages. In the municipal bond market, the new Federal tax law was the most prominent development of the year, helping to shrink the supply of new tax-exempt bonds to about $143.5 billion in 1986 from $200 billion in 1985, according to IDD Information Services. In the coming year, investment bankers expect the amount of new financing to contract slightly. The new tax law limits the amount of financing for housing and other projects undertaken in cooperation with, or on behalf of, private businesses. To cope with the new limits on tax-exempt financings, securities dealers are preparing for an increase in taxable bond sales by local governments from the $4.4 billion of such issues that was sold last year. For investors, the most confusing aspect of the new tax law is the possibility that interest on some kinds of bonds, such as those for housing and student loans, may be subject to the personal alternative minimum income tax. Because that tax will generally apply only to individuals with large amounts of tax shelters or other preference items, interest on those bonds subject to the tax will still be tax-exempt for many investors. ''I'm telling people to take advantage of the other guy's minimum tax problem, and buy these new bonds with the higher yields,'' said James Lebenthal, president of a New York municipal bond firm bearing his name. Recent issues of bonds subject to the alternative minimum tax have been yielding about half a percentage point more than bonds of similar quality and maturity that are not subject to the tax.
