386|1987\01\02|BRITISH PARTIES ENGAGED IN A NEW COMPETITION|Sometime this year, unless every political pundit here is mistaken, the British Government will call a general election, sending the parties out to do battle armed with their conflicting ideologies, exhortations and promises. But in recent weeks, Britain's two big parties have been engaged in a competition of a different sort - selling holiday gifts to the party faithful.|Sometime this year, unless every political pundit here is mistaken, the British Government will call a general election, sending the parties out to do battle armed with their conflicting ideologies, exhortations and promises. But in recent weeks, Britain's two big parties have been engaged in a competition of a different sort - selling holiday gifts to the party faithful. Sometime this year, unless every political pundit here is mistaken, the British Government will call a general election, sending the parties out to do battle armed with their conflicting ideologies, exhortations and promises. But in recent weeks, Britain's two big parties have been engaged in a competition of a different sort - selling holiday gifts to the party faithful. With glossy catalogues and slick promotions, the Conservative and Labor parties have been pressing their politically inspired wares on their constituents. The holiday-season campaign marks the first real venture into professional mail-order merchandising by British political parties, and their offerings and marketing philosophies are as different as the parties themselves. On the Left, the Labor Party has its ''Putting People First'' hip flask, which one commentator praised as ''ideal for keeping out the chill on winter picket duty or for the traditional Boxing Day fox-hunt saboteurs.'' Another big seller among the 50 some items offered is a cute mohair teddy bear clad in a vest proclaiming, ''I'm a Red Ted.'' 'An Essential Requirement' The Labor Party's catalogue dubs its sturdy red-and-yellow umbrella ''the activist's friend,'' adding that it is ''an essential requirement for wet weather campaigning.'' For the truly devout, Labor offers a framed color picture of its leader, Neil Kinnock. The teddy bears have outsold the Neil Kinnock photos four to one. On the Right, the Tories take a different approach. Their goods are less blatantly political and, not surprisingly, somewhat more up-market than Labor's merchandise. True, there is the ''I Love Maggie'' T-shirt - a reference to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, of course. But mostly, the Conservatives are offering items such as Wedgwood after-dinner mint trays and well-stocked food hampers. The top-of-the-line ''Lords Hamper,'' selling for $95, is chocked full of snacks and libations ranging from port and sherry to royal game soup and English brandy snaps. Not only the products, but also the thinking behind the two campaigns is worlds apart. ''Ours isn't propoganda,'' said Grahame Waterman, the 42-year-old director of the Conservative party's marketing arm. ''The average Conservative doesn't want to look like a walking political advertisement, with party slogans plastered all over him.'' By contrast, the Labor campaign is unabashedly ideological. ''We're looking to promote political ideas, not just sell goods,'' notes Steve Billcliffe, Labor's 36-year-old marketing manager. One intriguing aspect of the Labor promotion is sheer volume of fire-engine red as the color on its towels, running shirts, sports bags, checkbooks, key cases, unbrellas and other merchandise. This comes at a time when Mr. Kinnock has tried to curb the influence of the red-brandishing extremists in his party to broaden Labor's appeal. Profits Are Big Mr. Billcliffe defends the choice of so much scarlet with a free-market argument that would do Adam Smith proud. ''from a purely commercial point of view, we wanted to offer something for everyone,'' Mr. Billcliffe said, noting that the party has activists who ''like to wave a lot of red'' as well as moderates like Mr. Kinnock. The Labor marketing effort tends to refute Tory claims that their adversaries are wild-eyed leftists who would make profit a dirty word. Mr. Billcliffe estimates that on sales counted to date, the Labor merchandising program has turned a profit of roughly $30,000 on revenues of $90,000 - a profit margin so high that the likes of Lord Hanson of Hanson Trust PLC or Sir John Egan of Jaguar could hardly dream of equaling it. All this Mr. Billcliffe regards with unflappable pragmatism. ''There's nothing wrong with mixing capitalist venture with a socialist end product,'' he says. For all Labor's success, the Conservatives have sold more than twice as much, with revenues reaching $220,000. And based on the unaudited figures to date, it appears that in the marketplace, Mrs. Thatcher is winning the personality contest against Mr. Kinnock, since there have been about four times as many ''I Love Maggie'' T-shirts sold as Neil Kinnock photographs. Informed of these results, the Conservative party's Mr. Waterman replied, ''So what else is new?'' By the same reckoning, the sales figures place Mrs. Thatcher, who will soon become the longest-serving British prime minister since Winston Churchill, about neck-and-neck with the Labor teddy bear - and perhaps a slight edge to the teddy bear.
