389|1987\01\02|RANGERS GET CARPENTER FROM CAPITALS|Bobby Carpenter, once the franchise centerpiece and superstar center for the Washington Capitals, finally received a job offer from the Rangers yesterday in a deal that brought Carpenter and a second-round 1987 draft pick to New York.|Bobby Carpenter, once the franchise centerpiece and superstar center for the Washington Capitals, finally received a job offer from the Rangers yesterday in a deal that brought Carpenter and a second-round 1987 draft pick to New York. Bobby Carpenter, once the franchise centerpiece and superstar center for the Washington Capitals, finally received a job offer from the Rangers yesterday in a deal that brought Carpenter and a second-round 1987 draft pick to New York. In exchange, the Rangers sent to Washington three forwards - Mike Ridley, their second leading scorer this season; Kelly Miller, who has 6 goals and 14 assists, and Bob Crawford, who scored 36 goals for Hartford three seasons ago. The Rangers also picked up the final two years of Carpenter's contract, described by General Manager Phil Esposito of the Rangers as ''intricate'' and worth an estimated $400,000 a year. The trade concluded an episode known as ''our personal soap opera'' by Capitals players who wondered why a last-place Patrick Division team chose to let Carpenter, who once produced a 53-goal season for them, sit and collect his pay but not play for more than a month. It also ended a monthlong pursuit of the player by Esposito, who held out until yesterday morning for the Capitals to include a second-round draft pick in the Carpenter package. Esposito had no qualms about exchanging Ridley and also Crawford, a player he believed wouldn't rate a position on the Ranger club, for Carpenter. But he demanded the draft position in exchange for Miller. ''I've been interested in Bobby Carpenter for the past month or so,'' said Esposito from his home yesterday, ''but things didn't really get happening until this morning. It's been a wild day, and I'm excited about this.'' Carpenter will join the team today and is expected to play tomorrow night in Quebec. The 23-year-old Capitals center was considered the most attractive schoolboy hockey prospect the United States had ever produced when the Capitals got him in the 1981 entry draft. They selected Carpenter, who is from Beverly, Mass., just ahead of Hartford's position. Carpenter went directly from prep school to the National Hockey League and appeared to savor the transition, especially in 1984-85, when he became the first United States-born player to score 50 or more goals in a season. But since then, his squabbles with the Capitals' coach, Bryan Murray, escalated and his goal production plunged. In November, after a meeting with the Washington general manager, David Poile, failed to soothe the controversy, Poile encouraged Carpenter to agree to a trade, which he did. The next day Poile also telephoned Carpenter to tell him not to report to practice because, on the trading block or not, his services were no longer required. Poile was originally asking a higher price for Carpenter, but as the weeks went by and there were no takers, he adjusted his requirements. ''I look at him as a 50 goal-scorer, the other G.M.'s see him as a qualified 30 goal-scorer, so I guess the truth may lie someplace in the middle,'' Poile said. According to Esposito, there's no reason to worry about Carpenter's reputation for being hard to manage. ''I know enough of the story there to know it won't be a problem for us,'' he said. ''Right from the start, Bobby and Mr. Murray didn't get along. They were playing him at left wing, and that's not where he belongs. He'll play center for us. Anyway, I was the worst temperamental player there ever was, so I'm not worried about him.'' Esposito said Carpenter's position as the club's No. 1 center was not automatically guaranteed. ''He'll have to earn his way there, and he realizes that. Bobby doesn't intend to get prima donna treatment from us.'' Tom Webster, the Ranger coach, called Carpenter a quality player, and said: ''At first, I thought it was an awful lot to give up, but when you're getting a player like Carpenter, that's the price.'' Ridley, a 23-year-old center in his second year with the Rangers, has 16 goals and 20 assists, after a rookie season in which he scored 22 goals and added 43 assists.
