391|1987\01\02|NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 2, 1987|International|International International A3-11 Cardinal O'Connor apologized to Israelis and their Government for canceling meetings he had scheduled with Israeli leaders. The New York Archbishop spoke in his first public ceremony in Jerusalem. Page A1 The Virgin Mary will be honored in the first Marian year since 1953-54 beginning in June. Pope John Paul II announced the observance in a homily during a mass at St. Peter's Basilica. A7 Chinese students defied a Government ban and held a mass protest for democracy in the capital. The demonstration by thousands of college students was the largest in Beijing since 1976. A8 South African police fired birdshot and tear gas to disperse looters on a black beach, and a black mob attacked a train and killed an Indian youth in a day of racial violence on the Indian Ocean coast. A3 Stalemate in the Iran-Iraq war has raised fears that the conflict may spread to other Persian Gulf countries, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, according to Western military officials in the region. A11 Afghan leaders set a cease-fire in the seven-year war with rebel forces starting Jan. 15. But a spokesman for the seven insurgent groups said they rejected the move by the Soviet-backed Government. A10 Warsaw hippies get tolerance A4 Kohl's wrong tape on TV A4 Vietnam assembly ends A9 National A12-17, B6-7, D12-13 Officials suspected arson in a San Juan hotel swept by a flash fire that killed at least 43 people and injured 1,000. The blaze began in a ballroom where union members had rejected a proposed contact. A1 Hotel union leaders insisted they had nothing to do with the fire that engulfed the San Juan hotel. A survivor said a hotel cook had told her he feared violence in the union's bitter dispute with the hotel. D12 20 guests in the burning hotel lay sprawled on a 16th-floor balcony for four and a half hours Wednesday, certain they were going to die. But firefighters crossed the smoke-filled room and led them to the roof. A1 Survivors were angry, confused and uncomfortable in the wake of the Dupont Plaza Hotel blaze. Officials said it could be weeks before they had positive identifications of the badly burned victims. D13 New York survivors relieved D13 Puerto Rico does not require hotels to have sprinkler systems, Governor Rafael Hernandez Colon acknowledged. He said that hotels would be required to install them as soon as possible. D13 The fire is likely to expose the owner, Hotel Systems International Inc. of Santa Monica, Calif., to huge lawsuits similar to those brought against the M-G-M Grand Hotel in Las Vegas in 1980, lawyers said. D12 The President, stressing armament, seeks $1.8 trillion of military spending over five years while cutting farm aid by more than half and sharply curtailing the growth of many other domestic programs. A1 A man with the AIDS virus who is accused of street prostitution has officials in Jackson Miss., in a quandary over whether to prosecute him and risk spreading the AIDS in prison, or free him and risk spreading the disease on the street. A12 Reports of steering problems and unintended acceleration in some General Motors cars with front-wheel drive have prompted Federal officials to begin an inquiry involving six million automobiles from the 1980 to 1984 model years. A17 A bullet that wounded a passenger on a jet approaching Raleigh-Durham Airport Wednesday could have ricocheted, killed the pilot and caused the airliner to crash, an F.B.I. spokesman said. B7 The 1963 onion field murder of Ian Campbell, a police officer, prompted a life sentence for Gregory Ulas Powell. The California Supreme Court has issued a ruling that may result in his freedom. A13 3 of every 100 American men were in jail, in prison or under correctional supervision at the end of 1985, the Justice Department said. It said the number of adults under supervision increased by 17 percent from 1983 to 1985. A17 Shift in loan plan sought A14 Washington Talk B6 Perplexity and the Boesky case Loose lips and nuclear ships  Regional B1-5 Governor Cuomo was inaugurated for a second term, saying his administration had proved that ''the New York idea works'' - that government could be both compassionate and fiscally responsible. A1 A snowstorm touched the metropolitan region, after causing extensive damage along the Southern coast. The area prepared for coastal flooding, icy roads and traffic bottlenecks in this morning's rush. A1 Lawyers for two surviving victims of a racial attack said their clients would cooperate with Federal authorities, and they urged Governor Cuomo to name a special state prosecutor to handle the case. A1 An off-duty police officer was shot in the face without warning by youths the police said were carrying concealed switch-blades, brass knuckles and crack after he asked them not to smoke in a nonsmoking Long Island Rail Road car. B1 A 71-year-old French tourist died from head injuries suffered in a robbery near Times Square on New Year's Eve. The police said the victim, Jean Casse, struck his head when he fell during the attack on East 52d Street by a young man. B3 The new Corporation Counsel for New York City will be Peter L. Zimroth, a former chief assistant prosecutor in the Manhattan District Attorney's office, according to Koch administration officials. B1 Early Jan. 1 subway cars were filled with revelers wearing red-sequined slippers, or cowboy boots with spurs, or leather chaps, or confetti in their hair, or cardboard tiaras or metallic blue fezzes. B1 Kunstler is a subject at trial B3 Lundine is optimistic about role B5 Neediest Cases D14
