394|1987\01\02|CRYING AND PRAYING, WAITING FOR DEATH ABOVE THE FLAMES|For four and a half hours Wednesday, Dominick P. Pannunzio and 19 other guests in the burning Dupont Plaza Hotel lay sprawled on a 16th-story balcony, certain they were going to die.|For four and a half hours Wednesday, Dominick P. Pannunzio and 19 other guests in the burning Dupont Plaza Hotel lay sprawled on a 16th-story balcony, certain they were going to die. For four and a half hours Wednesday, Dominick P. Pannunzio and 19 other guests in the burning Dupont Plaza Hotel lay sprawled on a 16th-story balcony, certain they were going to die. ''Everybody was crying,'' the 50-year-old lawyer from Pennsylvania said. ''I was crying myself.'' Mr. Pannunzio, who had come out of the shower nude when he heard a commotion in the hall and grabbed a sheet to cover himself, said he and his group fruitlessly screamed and waved to attract the attention of rescue workers. ''At the end, we were all just praying,'' said Betsy Sorber, 26, who had flown to Puerto Rico with Mr. Pannunzio and five others on a gambling junket several days ago. Finally, she said, firefighters broke down the door of the smoke-filled hotel room and led them to the roof. 'What Is the Best Way to Die?' At that point, Mr. Pannunzio said, he had begun contemplating ''what was the best way to die, burning or jumping.'' Mr. Pannunzio, dressed today in a hospital worker's green surgical room pants and new running shoes, said he thought of jumping off the balcony with a mattress to cushion his fall. ''But that was too crazy,'' he said. One man in the group tried climbing up the side of the building toward the roof, but he kept slipping and seemed in danger of plunging to the ground. Finally, Mr. Pannunzio said, the others talked him into huddling with them on the balcony, wet towels and wash cloths pressed to their noses to help them breath in the dense black smoke. Fifteen minutes before the fire broke out, Mr. Pannunzio said, he had been playing craps in the ground-floor casino, continuing a winning streak of more than $10,000. He had gone up to his room, 1508, to shower before going shopping with Miss Sorber. She was resting on the bed in slacks pulled over a one-piece bathing suit. Mr. Pannunzio bounded out of the shower, threw open the room door and saw clouds of gray smoke and running guests. Together, they plunged into a nightmarish fire exit stairwell, with people screaming, pushing, shoving, falling and being trampled. ''We ran down to the eighth floor,'' he recalled, ''and we ran into a solid wall of people yelling, 'Go up! Go up! You can't get through here!' You couldn't see. Everyone was in a panic.'' 'People Were Gagging' ''At the 17th or 18th floor,'' Mr. Pannunzio continued, ''a bunch of people were coming down yelling, 'Down! down! You can't go up!' We tried to get into one of the halls but all the doors were locked. People were gagging and falling down. I was getting woozy.'' Suddenly, he said, a hysterical maid threw open a door on the 16th floor and Mr. Pannunzio and about 20 others surged behind him. The maid had keys and let them into a room. They soaked the towels and linen, pressed them to their faces and shuffled to the balcony. ''People were crying and praying: 'Dear God, dear God, we're going to die,' '' he said. Several times a helicopter crew swung a seat on a rope toward them but no one could reach it, Mr. Pannunzio said. At one point, Mr. Pannunzio said, he thought of the film, ''The Towering Inferno,'' and of the fire at the M-G-M Grand Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., in 1980. ''I thought, 'God, I'm on my couch watching television and I'm a part of this,' '' he said. ''I thought, 'Any minute I'm going to die.' '' When the rescue team broke through, Miss Sorber recalled, she could see only a tiny flicker of light from the usually bright helmet lights the men wore. ''We all held hands,'' Miss Sorber said, ''and they led us out. We couldn't see where we were going.'' Outside in fresh air, the group then had to scale a steel ladder that ran straight up the side of a wall leading to the roof, more than 20 stories above the street. One of Mr. Pannunzio's friends from Pennsylvania broke a window in the casino with a chair and jumped two stories to the pavement. He broke a leg and severely cut one arm. Another member of the party, Mr. Pannunzio said, was still unaccounted for this afternoon.
