395|1987\01\02|FRENCH TOURIST DIES OF INJURIES AFTER A MUGGING|A 71-year-old French tourist died early yesterday from head injuries suffered in a mugging as he walked to Times Square to view the New Year's Eve celebration.|A 71-year-old French tourist died early yesterday from head injuries suffered in a mugging as he walked to Times Square to view the New Year's Eve celebration. A 71-year-old French tourist died early yesterday from head injuries suffered in a mugging as he walked to Times Square to view the New Year's Eve celebration. The victim, identified by the police as Jean Casse, left the Scarlatti restaurant, at 34 East 52d Street, near Madison Avenue, shortly before midnight in the company of his wife, Renee, and headed toward Times Square. ''They were late, but they were going anyway,'' said a detective from the Midtown North Precinct, Lieut. James Cowan. He said Mr. Casse was attacked in front of 123 East 52d Street, while walking west between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, by a man in his late teens or early 20's. The assailant was described as a black man with close-cropped hair and wearing a beige or gray jacket and dark trousers. 'A Matter of Seconds' ''The whole thing took a matter of seconds - a typical mugging,'' he said. According to the police, Mrs. Casse, 69, a retired doctor, tried to pull the mugger off her husband, but Mr. Casse fell to the ground as the mugger ripped through his pockets. Mr. Casse's head crashed into the sidewalk, and he fell into a coma shortly after his arrival at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital. He died at about 10:30 A.M., of what a hospital spokesman said were ''massive intercranial injuries.'' The attacker made off with Mr. Casse's wallet, which the police said contained more than $500 in cash. The police issued a statement saying they ''desperately need witnesses of the incident to come forward to identify the attacking youth.'' The Midtown North Precinct has established a 24-hour hotline - 477-7447 - for information about the attack. The police said that the victim's wife was the only person to provide a description of the youth. Others Were Walking Behind The couple was part of a group of nine tourists from Toulouse, in the south of France. But one of the group, Jacques Periole, said yesterday that only three of the other tourists were near the couple, and that they were too far behind them to help or to identify the suspect, who fled on foot. Mr. Periole said the group had split up to hurry to Times Square in time for midnight because there was disagreement on the quickest route. ''I can't believe there were no other witnesses, Lieutenant Cowan said. ''There were hundreds of people in the immediate area.'' Mr. and Mrs. Casse, who have three children, arrived in New York on Dec. 28, on what the police believed to be their first visit to this country, with the group. The couple spoke no English, and the police said they had been scheduled to return to Toulouse on Saturday. The police asked Mrs. Casse to refrain from talking to the press until their investigation was completed, according to Lieutenant Cowan. In all, 10 homicides were reported in the city overnight With an estimated 300,000 revelers gathered in the Times Square area, the nearly 2,000 police officers there made 34 arrests on charges ranging from robbery to criminal possession of weapons and assault, according to a police spokesman, Officer Louis Llanes.
