396|1987\01\02|DEATH TOLL AT 43, 100 INJURED IN FIRE IN SAN JUAN HOTEL|Federal investigators today searched for signs of arson in the rubble of a casino and other public rooms of the luxury hotel that was swept by fire on New Year's Eve.|Federal investigators today searched for signs of arson in the rubble of a casino and other public rooms of the luxury hotel that was swept by fire on New Year's Eve. Federal investigators today searched for signs of arson in the rubble of a casino and other public rooms of the luxury hotel that was swept by fire on New Year's Eve. At least 43 people died in the fire, at the Dupont Plaza Hotel, and more than 100 were injured as 1,000 holiday guests attempted to flee flames and smoke in the 22-story beachfront structure, according to Police Superintendent Carlos Lopez Feliciano of San Juan. The Associated Press reported that the Secretary of Justice, Hector Rivera Cruz, had put the death toll at 60. Survivors of the fire said no alarms or public address or sprinkler systems went off and no organized evacuation was attempted by the hotel's employees. Seeking Signs of Arson The flash fire broke out in a hotel ballroom minutes after union staff workers met there and rejected a contract settlement offered by management hours before a strike deadline. The authorities said two minor fires of suspicious origin broke out in the hotel last weekend. They said investigators for the Federal Government and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico were looking into reports that the fire Wednesday was set as part of individual or organized harassment of the hotel in the labor dispute. However, officials said they had not found any physical evidence to support such a theory as investigators began combing through the hotel looking for signs of arson. Governor Tells of Suspicions Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon said at a news conference that hotel guests interviewed by investigators had reported ''there was last-minute word going around the hotel that something was going to happen'' before the blaze broke out in a ground-floor ballroom shortly before 3:30 P.M. ''On the basis of these suspicions, one tends to think this matter rises from the labor situation,'' the Governor said. If evidence points to sabotage, he continued, ''the magnitude of the criminal nature of this act goes beyond our imagination.'' Officials of Local 901 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, which represents about 250 workers at the hotel, denied any knowledge of the cause of the fire and said their members were not involved. Governor Hernandez Colon also said that the Puerto Rican fire code made no provision for fire sprinklers in hotels and none had been installed at the Dupont Plaza, the 23-year-old centerpiece of the Condado Beach resort section of San Juan. Witnesses said the fire Wednesday afternoon was followed by two or three explosions, sending a fireball rolling through the crowded casino, killing some gamblers and croupiers where they sat or stood at the gaming tables. Most of the 109 people hospitalized were treated for smoke inhalation and minor injuries and released, according to Dr. Carlos Gomez, chief of staff at the Central Medical Center. But 18 people remained hospitalized in critical condition, said a spokesman for the Governor. In the charred hotel, the dead sat upright in chairs as if frozen by the fire's first flash, said Mayor Baltizar Corrado del Rio of San Juan. There were also reports that the casino's main doors were closed after the first fire alarm as a precaution against smoke and as a security measure to guard the huge sums of cash on hand there. Most of the bodies on the destroyed ground-level floors of the hotel were clustered in the casino area. All but a few were burned beyond recognition. Identifying the Dead Forensic investigators from the Federal Bureau of Investigation were flown into Puerto Rico today to help in the identification of the bodies, many of whom were believed to be those of tourists from the United States. In addition, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms dispatched its national response team to Puerto Rico to help with the arson investigation. The 13-member team is made up of 10 special agents from the bureau, a forensic chemist, a specialist technician with expertise in explosives and a supervisor. A spokesman for the bureau, Jerry Rudden, said two additional specialists, a forensic chemist and an expert in fires and explosives, had also been sent. ''There will be additional people responding as needed,'' he said. He said that most of the team members had already arrived at Puerto Rico and that the Air Force was transporting the team's vehicle, a large, extensively equipped truck. Military Experts to Look In Mr. Rudden would not say whether or not the bureau believed the fire to be arson, but noted that the investigation had only just begun. ''The team will remain there as long as needed to determine the cause of the fire, he said.'' The Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, which last spring helped identify the remains of the seven astronauts killed in the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, has also dispatched three specialists to the scene, an institute spokesman said tonight in Washington. They included two pathologists and a forensic photographer. The fire, which burned for nearly five hours, was contained on the lower floors of the 22-story building, but billowing smoke enveloped the entire hotel in a dark sheath, trapping guests in upper-floor rooms. Some Caught in Elevators Some victims died in elevators that jammed between floors. during the height of the blaze. Many guests made their way to a penthouse restaurant and roof and were rescued there by helicopters that carried them to the beach. There the injured were treated as waves pounded the sand a few feet away and sea gulls wheeled away from the commotion and smoky haze. Susano Gonzalez Perez was one of the casino employees who survived. Today, still shaken but unhurt, he stood on the grounds of the hotel in the bright sunshine and recounted how the first faint whiff of smoke Wednesday afternoon was quickly followed by chaos. He was working a roulette wheel at the time. ''My supervisor shouted there was fire and for everyone to run,'' Mr. Gonzalez said, ''but there was no time. Fire coming like a ball shot across the ceiling. It hit my supervisor and killed him in his tracks.'' The croupier and others scrambled for safety as the fireball was followed by thick, choking smoke. Mr. Gonzalez and the others escaped after someone smashed open a part of the tinted floor-to-ceiling windows that overlooked the ocean. 'People Were Hysterical' Those escaping jumped several feet to the poolside patio below as sunbathers, some dazed and cut by the flying glass, stumbled and pushed their way toward safety on the beach. ''People were hysterical,'' said Larry Roberts, a 34-year-old designer from Manhattan who, with a friend from Milwaukee, Jerry Kipnis, 30, had made a last-minute decision to spend the holiday week in San Juan. ''Once the explosion shattered the glass windows, everyone at the pool took off like crazy, jumping over barbed wire and knocking over older people who couldn't get over it. ''Everyone was worried about a husband or kids who were upstairs and couldn't get out,'' Mr. Roberts said. ''It was like watching a movie, seeing people hanging from the balconies or tying bedsheets together to try to get down.'' On the level beneath the restaurant and the casino was the kitchen, and behind it, the ballroom, which about 100 members of the teamster union had just vacated before the fire was discovered. It was in the ballroom that the fire started, according to Rudy Torruella, the legal consultant for the hotel, which is owned by Hotel Systems International of Santa Monica, Calif. The hotel was originally operated by Sheraton when it opened in 1963 at a cost of $12 million. It was sold in 1979. ''The only ones at the union meeting were union members and representatives,'' the lawyer said. ''When smoke was detected coming out of the ballroom, attempts were made to enter but a number of doors were barred from the inside. A few minutes later an explosion occurred in the area of the casino and the kitchen.'' Speculation on Spread Law-enforcement officials speculated that a fire that started in the ballroom might have spread to gas lines and other fuels stored in the kitchen or boiler room, but no word from the staff was available on whether this, in fact, was the sequence. Mayor Corrado said many Puerto Ricans frequented the casinos at beachfront hotels. Several local people who were described as inveterate gamblers were listed by their families as missing after the fire. Among others missing were two members of a Pennsylvania family visiting San Juan from a cruise ship, the Jubilee, which had sailed from Miami. They had gone to the Dupont Plaza to visit the casino and were there when the fire erupted. In the confusion later 9 of the 11 members of the family were reunited, but an 83-year-old grandmother and her 20-year-old grandson never appeared. Later, after the New Year rolled in and dazed partygoers in gay party hats came from all over San Juan to view the floodlit, still-smoldering hotel, the Jubilee left port without the family. The nine survivors checked into a hotel to wait to be summoned to the morgue. Many people fled the burning hotel without money and only the clothes they wore. They spent a restless night at other hotels and private homes, which opened their doors to them. Some, like Christine Ryan and Robert Walker, New Yorkers, slept on mattresses on the floor of a big room at a hotel. As the New Year came, they numbly drank duty-free champagne they had bought on a shopping trip in the Virgin Islands: On their return, they found their hotel ablaze. Watching a Jets Game They had experienced the two fires there last weekend and were familiar with the labor problems, Miss Ryan and Mr. Walker said. The manager told them that a fire on Saturday afternoon had been set in a ninth-floor storage room, the New Yorkers said. ''I was watching the Jets' playoff game when all this smoke poured out of the floor below,'' Mr. Walker, a stockbroker, recalled. ''I was really angry. It made me miss the end of the game.'' Sidney Sheiman of Brooklyn, another guest, said that after the fire Saturday, the hotel posted security guards on every floor. ''They followed us around,'' he said. ''It was the third fire for us,'' Priscilla Sprung of Manhattan said today as she picked through items of clothing and toiletries contributed to the survivors by the Salvation Army. ''We just thought it was part of the hotel routine by that time.''  PARTIAL LISTING OF DEAD IN FIRE SAN JUAN, P.R., Jan. 1 (AP) - Here, as compiled by The Associated Press, is a partial list of the victims in the Dupont Plaza Hotel fire:  DEATHS REPORTED BY RELATIVES  LLOYD HUNT, 69, of St. Louis.  DEATHS REPORTED BY SAN JUAN MEDICAL CENTER  GAMALIEL CASTILLO of Puerto Rico.  LUIS GARCIA BENITEZ of Puerto Rico.  ROBERTO MENDEZ MENDEZ of Puerto Rico.  RAFAEL BERRIOS LOPEZ of Puerto Rico.  GABRIEL CASTILLO MALAVE, residence unknown.  LARRY WILSON, residence unknown.  ERIKA UNTERNAEHRER of Switzerland.  DEATHS REPORTED BY THE CANADIAN EXTERNAL AFFAIRS OFFICE  JEAN FOGEL, Toronto.  LILY SNIDER, Toronto.
