398|1987\01\02|OKLAHOMA BEATS ARKANSAS, 42-8; SIXTH IN ROW FOR PAC-10|Well before Arizona State switched from the Western Athletic Conference to the more prestigious Pacific 10 in 1978, the Pac-10 had gained dominance over the Big Ten in their annual Rose Bowl match. In its first Rose Bowl appearance, Arizona State carried on the tradition of its league today.|Well before Arizona State switched from the Western Athletic Conference to the more prestigious Pacific 10 in 1978, the Pac-10 had gained dominance over the Big Ten in their annual Rose Bowl match. In its first Rose Bowl appearance, Arizona State carried on the tradition of its league today. Well before Arizona State switched from the Western Athletic Conference to the more prestigious Pacific 10 in 1978, the Pac-10 had gained dominance over the Big Ten in their annual Rose Bowl match. In its first Rose Bowl appearance, Arizona State carried on the tradition of its league today. After trailing Michigan, 15-3, early in the second period, the Sun Devils scored a touchdown on their last drive of the first half and on the first drive of the second half to gain a 22-15 triumph over the Wolverines before 103,168 fans. Jeff Van Raaphorst, the Arizona State quarterback who was voted the most valuable player of this 73d Rose Bowl, tossed short passes to his flanker, Bruce Hill, for both Sun Devil touchdowns. Ken Bostrom kicked three field goals to tie a Rose Bowl game record as the Pac-10 champion beat the Big Ten champion for the sixth straight year and for the 16th time in the last 18 years. The Big Ten trails in the series, 22-19. Strong Defense The fast and swarming Arizona State defense shut down Michigan completely after the Wolverines got their second touchdown early in the second period. When Robby Boyd of Arizona State intercepted Jim Harbaugh's pass with just a minute left, the Sun Devils nailed down the biggest football victory in the history of the Tempe, Ariz., university. Arizona State, ranked among the nation's top 10 teams, finished its year with a 10-1-1 record while Coach Bo Schembechler's Wolverines, ranked among the top five before today, ended at 11-2. This marked the seventh time in eight Rose Bowl tries a Schembechler Michigan team had lost. He has a 3-11 bowl record in his 18 seasons at Michigan. ''We come out here every year and get beaten by 7 points,'' Schembechler said. ''We do it every year.'' When Van Raaphorst accepted the m.v.p. award, he said, ''I'm glad I had the opportunity my Dad never had.'' The senior Arizona State quarterback, who completed 16 of 36 passes for 193 yards and two touchdowns without an interception, is the son of Dick Van Raaphorst, who was Ohio State's place-kicker in 1961 when the Buckeyes won the Big Ten title. But the Ohio State faculty, citing ''overemphasis'' on football, voted against allowing the Buckeyes a trip to the 1962 Rose Bowl. Arizona State, in only its second year under Coach John Cooper, settled down after being jarred by the two early Michigan scores and played so well for the last two and a half quarters that Michigan rarely had the ball long enough to make an impression. In the second half, Michigan had possession for less than 10 minutes. ''You can't do much without the football,'' Schembechler said. ''We coach to protect the football,'' Cooper said.  No Turnovers Arizona State, which turned the ball over only 15 times during the regular season, didn't give it up once today. The Devils intercepted Harbaugh three times after his two touchdown aerials. The Sun Devils seemed to be in trouble when Michigan had to punt from deep in its territory late in the second quarter. The Devils took a fair catch on their 40 with 3 minutes 59 seconds left in the half. This was five minutes after Bostrom had kicked his second field goal, cutting the Arizona State deficit to 15-6. Out of the shotgun formation, which he used well all game, Van Raaphorst flipped a short screen pass to his tailback, Darryl Harris, on the third play after the punt. With good escort blocking, Harris made a gain of 19 yards on the screen pass. He was the game's leading rusher with 109 yards and added 34 receiving. Van Raaphorst ran for another 10 on the next play. Then Van Raaphorst connected with Hill for 15 yards to get the ball to the Michigan 5. Two plays later it was at the 4. That's when Van Raaphorst connected with Hill, who was deep in the end zone, for the first Arizona State touchdown, just 29 seconds before the half ended. Bostrom's extra point made the intermission score, 15-13, for Michigan. But the momentum had swung Arizona State's way. The Sun Devils took the second half kickoff and started a drive from their 20. In 15 time-consuming plays, they went the distance. Van Raaphorst, however, missed on a 2-point conversion pass, so the score remained 19-15 until Bostrom's final field goal, which came 44 seconds into the final quarter. Harbaugh directed a 66-yard touchdown drive in eight plays on the first series of the game. Jamie Morris, the tailback whose brother Joe runs for the Giants, ran the ball in for the score from the 18. In a surprise play after the touchdown, Schembechler had his place-kicker, Mike Gillette, throw a pass to Gerald White for 2 points. The snap from center went directly to Gillette, a former high school quarterback. Harbaugh came back with another good drive of 58 yards in nine plays that ended when he went over from the 2, giving Michigan had a 15-3 lead. From then on Arizona State shut down Michigan and Morris, who gained 1,039 yards in the regular season. He rushed for only 47 yards today, only 4 in the second half. ARIZONA ST. WINS
