399|1987\01\02|OHIO ST. INTERCEPTS TEXAS A&M, 28-12|Ohio State intercepted five passes by Kevin Murray today, returning two for touchdowns, to rout Texas A&M, 28-12, in the first Cotton Bowl appearance by a team from the Big Ten Conference.|Ohio State intercepted five passes by Kevin Murray today, returning two for touchdowns, to rout Texas A&M, 28-12, in the first Cotton Bowl appearance by a team from the Big Ten Conference. Ohio State intercepted five passes by Kevin Murray today, returning two for touchdowns, to rout Texas A&M, 28-12, in the first Cotton Bowl appearance by a team from the Big Ten Conference. Murray, a redshirt junior who starred in last year's Cotton Bowl game, was off-target all afternoon. He threw only eight interceptions in 11 regular-season games. He was the player of the year in the Southwest Conference this season, completing 61 percent of his passes and averaging more than 220 yards a game. Murray set a Cotton Bowl record with 292 passing yards in the Aggies' 36-16 victory over Auburn last New Year's Day. 49-Yard Interception Return But today, Michael Kee, an Ohio State linebacker, insured the victory by picking off a Murray pass with just under three minutes remaining in the game and racing 49 yards for the final score. In the opening moments of the third quarter, Chris Spielman, the consensus all-America linebacker, stretched the Buckeyes' 7-6 halftime lead by intercepting a Murray pass and running it back 24 yards for a touchdown. Ohio State stretched its lead to 21-6 on a 3-yard run by Vince Workman midway through the third period. Kee and Spielman led the Ohio State defense with 18 unassisted tackles between them. Style Changes for Buckeyes ''It was a great exhibition of defensive football,'' said Coach Earle Bruce, who had his Buckeyes in red shoes and himself in a dark suit and a black hat with a scarlet feather in it. Bruce normally dresses for games in a golf shirt, windbreaker and a baseball hat. ''The thing I can't imagine is that we could return two of those interceptions for touchdowns,'' Bruce said. Spielman, a junior who was voted tha game's most valuable player, said Ohio State used three defensive formations in the game that it had not used during the regular season. He said the Buckeyes knew Murray ''would rather throw the ball than run.'' He added: ''I think he was a little frustrated.'' Murray took full blame. ''It wasn't anything they were doing,'' Murray said. ''It was misreading from my part. A couple of times I threw the ball down there and just didn't see the white jerseys. ''Five interceptions is enough to kill any team. Spielman was used as a spy out there. They used the safety differently, and Spielman was everywhere.'' Ohio State Finishes 10-3 The victory gave Ohio State, co-champion of the Big Ten, a 10-3 record after it had opened the season with consecutive losses to Alabama and Washington. Texas A&M, which was aiming to become the only the second team to win two consecutive Cotton Bowls, finished at 9-3. Texas won in 1969 and 1970. Ohio State's victory helped ease the pain of a disappointing 26-24 loss to Michigan that kept the Buckeyes from winning the Big Ten title outright and playing in the Rose Bowl. Despite amassing 150 yards in total offense in the first quarter, Ohio State held only a 7-6 halftime lead. Ohio State's first score came a few seconds into the second quarter, when Jim Karsatos capped an 80-yard drive with a smartly-executed, 3-yard touchdown run. Karsatos scored on an option play, knifing into the end zone ahead of several defenders. He had completed five consecutive passes that brought the Buckeyes within striking range. The touchdown wiped out the 3-0 lead the Aggies had taken on a 30-yard field goal by Scott Slater. Over all, the two defensive units intercepted eight passes on the day, tying a Cotton Bowl record set in 1962 by Mississippi and Texas. The five interceptions from Murray exceeded the previous record of four, yielded by Joe Montana of Notre Dame to Houston in 1979. Kee's 49-yard return broke by 2 yards a record set by Byron (Whizzer) White for Colorado in 1938, long before he became a Supreme Court Justice. The defeat overshadowed an impressive game by Roger Vick, the fullback who scored the Aggies' only touchdown with just under 10 minutes to play. Vick, a 6-foot-3-inch, 221-pound senior who led the Southwest conference in rushing, shook off tacklers consistently, but the Buckeyes contained his longest run to 20 yards. He averaged nearly 5 yards on 24 carries for 113 yards. Ohio State's backs, George Cooper and Workman, combined for 100 yards between them. Murray, who said earlier this week that he would return for his fifth year of eligibility next season, finished with 12 completions in 31 passing attempts for 143 yards. Karsatos was 10 for 21, for 195 yards, with 2 interceptions. COTTON BOWL
