403|1987\01\02|OKLAHOMA BEATS ARKANSAS, 42-8; TWO SCORES FOR TILLMAN|Oklahoma, sparked to life by Spencer Tillman's two breakaway touchdown runs in the second quarter after a dull first quarter, defeated Arkansas, 42-8, tonight in the most lopsided Orange Bowl game since 1973.|Oklahoma, sparked to life by Spencer Tillman's two breakaway touchdown runs in the second quarter after a dull first quarter, defeated Arkansas, 42-8, tonight in the most lopsided Orange Bowl game since 1973. Oklahoma, sparked to life by Spencer Tillman's two breakaway touchdown runs in the second quarter after a dull first quarter, defeated Arkansas, 42-8, tonight in the most lopsided Orange Bowl game since 1973. Tillman scored on runs of 77 and 21 yards, and the quarterback, Jamelle Holieway, ran for two short third-quarter touchdowns as the Sooners grew stronger throughout the game. The Razorbacks, who dominated the first quarter and appeared to play evenly with Oklahoma in the second, were completely ineffective in the second half and were intercepted five times on the night before scoring in the game's closing seconds. The victory, Oklahoma's second straight and record 11th over all in the Orange Bowl, provided some measure of revenge for the Razorbacks' 31-6 upset victory over the Sooners in the 1978 game. Oklahoma's 34-point margin tonight was the largest in an Orange Bowl since Nebraska clobbered Notre Dame, 40-6, in 1973. The game was played on a soggy field that was left uncovered when torrential rains soaked the Miami area New Year's Eve. Gray splotches of mud at midfield surrounded the smiling King Orange symbol that had to be repainted this afternoon. The Sooners were returning to the site of their lone defeat this season, a 28-16 loss to Miami Sept. 27 that toppled them from the top of the nation's rankings. Had Oklahoma won that game, it would have been playing Penn State here tonight for the top national ranking in a rematch of last year's Orange Bowl, which Oklahoma won, 25-10. Instead, top-ranked Miami will play second-ranked Penn State Friday night in the Fiesta Bowl at Tempe, Ariz. Brian Bosworth, Oklahoma's all-America linebacker, was one of four Orange Bowl team members - three from Oklahoma, one from Arkansas - who were barred from playing tonight after testing positive for steroids last month. Bosworth, however, was one of four Oklahoma co-captains representing the Sooners at the opening coin toss tonight, wearing his jersey over a pair of blue jeans. The Razorbacks controlled the ball for most of the first half as they ran 41 plays to the Sooners' 21, and held Oklahoma to just 14 yards in the first quarter. But the Sooners, who were favored by two and a half touchdowns, built a 14-0 halftime lead on two nearly identical second-quarter pitchout plays that led to touchdown scores by Spencer Tillman. Arkansas had the first scoring opportunity, 10 minutes into the game, but Kendall Trainor fell about an end zone short on a 52-yard field-goal attempt and the first quarter ended scoreless. On the third play of the second quarter, Holieway pitched right to Tillman on second down, and the senior halfback streaked 77 yards down the right sideline for a touchdown. Two subsequent second-quarter Arkansas drives into Oklahoma territory ended when Greg Thomas passes were intercepted, first by Sonny Brown and then by Dante Jones. The second interception set up a nine-play, 54-yard drive by the Sooners, which ended when Holieway again pitched right to Tillman, who ran it in from the 21-yard line. Tillman set an Oklahoma freshman record when he rushed for 1,047 yards in 1983, but missed much of his sophomore and junior seasons recovering from several hamstring injuries. As a senior this season, he was only the fourth-leading rusher for the Sooners, and the most yardage he gained in a game was 80 against Kansas State. He accounted for 107 yards on six carries in the first half tonight. The Sooners doubled their margin in the first seven minutes of the second half. After shutting down the Razorbacks deep in their own territory, the Sooners took over at the Arkansas 44 on their first possession. On the second play, Holieway connected on a 36-yard pass to Derrick Shepard. Two plays later, Holieway ran the ball in from the 2-yard line for Oklahoma's third touchdown. On the second play of the Sooners' next possession, Holieway handed off to Lydell Carr, who ran 60 yards before being brought down. Holieway kept the ball on the next play and scored from the 4-yard line. Arkansas was forced to punt from its end zone near the end of the third quarter, but regained posession when Bubba Barrow recovered Eric Mitchell's fumbled punt return attempt. Thomas passed the Razorbacks to the Oklahoma 33, but his next pass landed in the hands of Oklahoma's Derrick White. BOSWORTH'S ARRAY OF APPAREL Even though he was ineligible to play in the game, Bosworth attracted attention. He wore a blue headband as well as his Oklahoma jersey when he went to midfield for the coin toss. While standing on the sidelines before the game, Bosworth wore the orange No. 14 jersey of the University of Miami's Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback, Vinny Testaverde. Later in the game, Bosworth donned a shirt with ''N.C.A.A.'' in big letters. Under each letter, the shirt read: ''National Communists Against Athletes. Welcome to Russia.'' The reference was to the drug tests conducted by the National Collegiate Athletic Association. ''These tests are like going into a dark room with a shotgun,'' Bosworth said. ''I got picked off early.''  ARIZONA ST. WINS
