404|1987\01\02|LAWYERS ASSERT QUEENS VICTIMS WOULD AID U.S.|Lawyers for the two surviving victims of the Howard Beach attack said yesterday that their clients would cooperate with Federal authorities if they take over the case. But the lawyers said they would not be satisfied unless Governor Cuomo appointed a special state prosecutor to handle the case.|Lawyers for the two surviving victims of the Howard Beach attack said yesterday that their clients would cooperate with Federal authorities if they take over the case. But the lawyers said they would not be satisfied unless Governor Cuomo appointed a special state prosecutor to handle the case. Lawyers for the two surviving victims of the Howard Beach attack said yesterday that their clients would cooperate with Federal authorities if they take over the case. But the lawyers said they would not be satisfied unless Governor Cuomo appointed a special state prosecutor to handle the case. The lawyers, Alton H. Maddox Jr. and C. Vernon Mason, made their comments in separate telephone interviews. It was their first response to a report by law-enforcement officials on Wednesday that District Attorney John J. Santucci of Queens may turn the case over to Federal authorities. 'Bad Faith' Is Charged Mr. Maddox represents Cedric Sandiford, described by the authorities as the state's key witness. Mr. Mason represents another victim, Timothy Grimes. After initially cooperating, Mr. Sandiford has declined since retaining Mr. Maddox to cooperate in the investigation of the death of the third victim, Michael Griffith. Mr. Grimes has also declined to cooperate. The lawyers have accused Mr. Santucci's office and the police of ''bad faith'' and a cover-up in their inquiry -a charge Mr. Santucci and other officials have strenuously denied. Mr. Maddox has offered a different account from the police of officers' treatment of Mr. Sandiford after the attack. Mr. Maddox has also criticized how the police dealt with the driver of the car that killed Mr. Griffith, and Mr. Maddox has differed with the police on Mr. Sandiford's account of the death. The lawyers have not offered details to support their charge. The police did not charge the driver, Dominick Blum, a 24-year-old court officer, with any crime, although he acknowledged leaving the scene; he returned an hour later. Mr. Maddox has said Mr. Blum should be arrested for murder. The police say a grand jury may yet indict Mr. Blum for leaving the scene, but they say he had no connection to the attackers. Yesterday, Governor Cuomo's press secretary, Martin Steadman, said of Mr. Maddox: ''I think this man has no credibility, zero credibility. And I answer his reckless charges only with sorrow because they don't deserve to be answered. But because of the dimension of the tragedy in Howard Beach, I'm answering them.'' Mayor Koch said yesterday that he still thought Mr. Sandiford should testify before a grand jury, and Mr. Steadman said the Governor also urged such a step. The Mayor and the Governor's spokesman also repeated the suggestion that the lawyers should take any allegation of police or prosecutorial misconduct to the special prosecutor for the New York City criminal justice system, Charles J. Hynes. Mr. Griffith, a 23-year-old Brooklyn man, was struck and killed by Mr. Blum's car after he and the other two black men fled a gang of white youths who had chased and beaten them on the night of Dec. 19-20. Except for the attackers, Mr. Sandiford is believed to be the only witness to the end of the chase. Three youths have been charged with reckless endangerment in the case, but a Queens judge dismissed murder, manslaughter and assault charges against them on Monday, after Mr. Sandiford would not testify. ''We would urge Sandiford and Grimes to cooperate with a Federal investigation,'' Mr. Mason said. But he added, ''Turning the case over to the Federal authorities is an admission that the State of New York is not prepared to confront one of the most serious racial incidents in the history of this country.'' Mr. Maddox said that giving the investigation to the Federal Government ''would send a dangerous signal to the black community and would only aggravate the current situation.'' 'The Same Precarious Position' ''It would tell us that we are in the same precarious position as our brothers in the South were in in the 1950's and 60's: that is, that the only government that would be willing to protect our civil rights was the Federal Government,'' Mr. Maddox added. Local law-enforcement officials have said Mr. Santucci might turn the case over to the Federal authorities because it would be easier to gather evidence and convict the defendants under Federal law than under state law, even without Mr. Sandiford's testimony. They said this was so because Federal immunity and conspiracy laws make it easier to obtain and use testimony from accomplices to a crime. Penalties for a Federal civil-rights conviction in which the violation caused a death could be up to life in prison, the same maximum as for a murder conviction in New York State. A spokesman for Mr. Santucci, Thomas McCarthy, declined yesterday to confirm whether the District Attorney was considering calling in the Federal authorities, saying only that he was ''exploring a variety of options.'' Lawyers Are Disputed But Mr. McCarthy sharply disputed the lawyers' contention that giving the case to the Federal Government would be an admission of failure by the state. ''It is the failure of Mr. Sandiford to come forward that puts Mr. Santucci in the position of having to consider the various alternatives,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''That is not a failure of the system, but a failure of cooperation that has created this situation. Remove the block and the system can work. Don't put the block in front and say, 'See, the system doesn't work.' '' Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, said his office had not received ''any direct or official request'' from Mr. Santucci to join the case. But he said ''they have been consulting and conferring with us on it'' for several days. Mr. Maloney confirmed that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had begun a preliminary investigation of the Howard Beach case at the request of the Justice Department in Washington. But he said that by law, his office would need the approval of the United States Attorney General to intercede. Decision Expected Soon Mr. Maloney said the normal procedure would be for Mr. Santucci to request intercession and for the United States Attorney's office to make a recommendation to the Attorney General on whether to accept it. He would not comment on whether he would recommend joining the case, but said he hoped ''some decision would be made by sometime next week, just because of the nature of the case and the sensitivity of it.'' Mr. Koch said, ''The best way to serve justice and to do it expeditiously is for the witness to come in and tell his story before the grand jury, and why he doesn't is a great mystery to most New Yorkers.'' At the same time, the Mayor said, ''Mr. Maddox should go to Joe Hynes and make his case, if he has one, of a cover-up. They apparently decline to do that, and why they decline is a mystery.'' Mr. Steadman said the Governor also believed the lawyers should take their case to Mr. Hynes, who is responsible for investigating allegations of police, judicial and prosecutorial misconduct in New York City, if they were dissatisifed with the investigation. Mr. Steadman said the Governor's Director of Criminal Justice, Lawrence T. Kurlander, had reviewed the case and told Mr. Cuomo he could find no evidence of a cover-up or improper actions by law-enforcement authorities. Mr. Steadman said, ''There is a first-class special prosecutor in place,'' speaking of Mr. Hynes. ''They should go to him if a special prosecutor is what they truly believe they need.'' Mr. Maddox, responding to the Mayor and Mr. Steadman, said he had not gone to Mr. Hynes and did not intend to because ''he does not have the mandate to cover all aspects of what is involved in this case.'' ''When Mr. Hynes was appointed, the scope of his jurisdiction did not envision racially biased cases, and he does not have the resources or the equipment to deal with those kinds of cases.''
