406|1987\01\02|AFTER INFERNO, CONFUSION AND ANGER|For Lorraine Sherman of Brooklyn, the disaster was far from over today.|For Lorraine Sherman of Brooklyn, the disaster was far from over today. For Lorraine Sherman of Brooklyn, the disaster was far from over today. She was in her room on the ninth floor of the Dupont Plaza Hotel when a fire broke out Wednesday afternoon on the hotel's lower floors. She recalled spending ''a couple of hours, an eternity,'' on the terrace until firefighters using ropes were able to lower her to safety. Today, Mrs. Sherman spent another eternity waiting in the tropical sun across the street from the charred 22-story hotel. ''My husband was in the casino,'' she said in a trembling voice, her cheeks wet with tears. ''And as of now, he's still missing.'' Difficulty Identifying Bodies Police and government officials said it could be days or even weeks before those who perished in the fire were definitively identified. ''Most of the bodies are totally burned,'' said Danny Velez, press secretary to Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon.  For those who survived, New Year's Day was filled with confusion, anger and questions. Many survivors lingered near the 420-room hotel. Most were barefoot or wearing only bathing suits, bathrobes, T-shirts or whatever clothes they had on when the fire broke out. A number of survivors complained that no alarms or sprinkler systems went off after the fire broke out and there was no organized attempt to evacuate hotel guests. Others complained about conditions after the fire. ''It's outrageous,'' said Barbara Zellman, a teacher from Manhattan. ''I have no money. My passport, my tickets, all my things are in my room. They haven't even given us any information.'' Late this afternoon Dupont Plaza's director, Bruce Shulman, said that all guests would be reimbursed for lodging and meals through Saturday and provided travel expenses. Personal possessions still in the hotel, he said, would be bagged and shipped later. For many survivors, however, lost property seemed the least important concern. Thomas Cadden, a 35-year-old lawyer from Meriden, Conn., said he was glad just to be alive. When the blaze erupted he was in the casino, the area where the largest number of deaths appear to have occurred. ''I was sitting at the blackjack table,'' he said, speaking from his bed at the Pavia hospital where he underwent four hours of surgery Wednesday night. ''I was looking at the ocean through the window and I saw smoke. I said to the dealer, 'Where is that coming from?' '' 'There Was Total Chaos' To Mr. Cadden's surprise, the dealer did not look up from the table. Instead, he continued to deal the cards. ''Then I heard this explosion and thick black smoke started pouring in,'' he said. In the rapidly darkening room, ''there was total chaos, panic, people screaming and running,'' he said. Somehow, he made his way to the window. ''I thought either I go through this window or I die here,'' he said. He grabbed a chair and smashed the glass, crawled out onto the ledge, cutting his hands on sharp glass, then lowered himself to a second ledge, which collapsed beneath him. ''I fell roughly 25 feet, a long way, and I fractured my ankle,'' he said. ''A friend of mine and two college kids saw me and they came over and helped.'' Charles J. Collins of Paxton, Mass., who was in a restaurant by the pool, told how he, his wife and daughter scaled a three-foot wall topped by barbed wire and dropped 12 feet to the beach. ''We could look up and see people banging on the glass trying to get out of the casino,'' he said. ''Everybody was screaming. People were hung up in barbed wire. People were hanging off the balconies. The smoke was so bad you couldn't see the people on the upper floors.'' Nancy Brensson, a 12-year-old from Cresskill, N.J., said she was with her parents in their 12th-floor room when she noticed white smoke outside. ''My dad opened the terrace door and the smoke came rushing in and it started to get dark,'' she said. They left the room and tried going down the staircase but ''it was filled with black smoke and we could see flames below,'' she said. They headed for the roof, where they waited for about an hour, as more and more people joined them. ''I was prepared to die,'' said Nancy's mother, Baiba, 39. ''I just didn't know whether it would be from fire or from smoke.'' Eventually, ''a helicopter came,'' Nancy said. ''We had to jump to get into it. My father almost missed: He was hanging out of it for a while.'' Like many survivors, the Brenssons had strong words of praise for ordinary citizens of San Juan and for other tourists who came to their aid. ''There was this one guy named Nick and his wife and they were on the roof calming everyone and kind of taking charge,'' Nancy said.  Mr. Cadden, as well as others at the hospital, emphasized that they had been well cared for by medical personnel. But there was also sharp criticism of some aspects of the rescue effort and outright anger toward the hotel staff and management. Concern Over Earlier Fires ''There have been at least two other fires here recently,'' said Murray Fink, an engineering designer from Brooklyn. ''I had asked security about it and they said, 'Don't worry.' I asked about smoke alarms and the concierge told me, 'Oh, we don't need those, the building is concrete.' '' Robert Howard, an accountant from Livingston, N.J., said one fire broke out about 12:30 A.M. Sunday in a storage room on the ninth floor. He said that he had heard no fire alarms but that the teen-age children of another guest had alerted everyone by pounding on doors. One man pulled a fire alarm, Mr. Howard said, ''but it didn't work.'' The Howard family moved to another hotel the next day. ''I said to my wife,'' he said, ''either we find a room elsewhere or we're off this island.'' Although government officials today would say only that arson could not be ruled out, many guests felt certain that was the cause, adding that they thought it was related to a union's dispute with the hotel. The union denies any role in the fire. ''It was going on all week, they were burning mattresses and there were rumors that it had to do with the union,'' said Michael McGahan, a stockbroker from Mineola, L.I. ''But it was being treated more or less like a joke, not like it was something serious.'' Mr. Shulman, the hotel director, said this afternoon that there had been three small fires at the hotel within the past 10 days and that 30 extra security guards had been put on duty. He said the hotel conformed with all safety regulations. Some guests discussed what they thought could have been indications that day of troubles to come. ''We noticed that the maids made the rooms up earlier and then were gone and that the kitchen staff left early,'' said Linda Wolf of Bloomfield, Conn. ''There were arguments, verbal fights among the staff in the dining room. We had lunch at one o'clock and the waiters left before my husband could pay the check.'' While some employees may have just wanted to be home early New Year's Eve, ''I was here at Christmas and they didn't behave that way,'' she said. Witnesses and survivors put the start of the fire at no later than 3:30, and some expressed dismay that fire engines did not arrive until nearly 4 o'clock. Alexander Leighton, who owns a guest house, Casa Blanca, half a block from from the smelled smoke as he was walking his dog on the beach. ''I checked my watch - I'm a real nut for time,'' he said. It was 3:26, he noted. A View From the Beach Then a curl of black smoke caught his eye. It was coming from the lip of the roof over a hotel restaurant adjacent to the casino on the lobby level. From the beach Mr. Leighton looked into the casino through its large tinted windows. He could make out figures inside. Slot machines glowed in chrome-lined rows. Shadows moved near the craps tables. Silhouettes were hunched over the blackjack tables. Then, he said, an explosion sent a fireball flaring inside the tinted windows and the composition he had observed moments before broke apart. Toni Goldberg flew from Philadelphia late Wednesday night in hope of finding her 70-year-old mother but had had no success. ''I've checked all the hospitals, and she's not there,'' she said this afternoon. A lucky few did find their loved ones. ''Until 10:30 at night I thought for sure my daughter was dead,'' said Cecile Leprohon of Montreal, who escaped from her 16th-floor room into the basket of a hovering helicopter. ''I prayed and I promised a thousand dollars to the Church if she was alive. Now,'' she said, touching the sleeve of the bathrobe worn by her daughter, Judith, ''I'll be happy to pay.''
