407|1987\01\02|UNION IN HOTEL DISPUTE INSISTS IT HAD NO ROLE|Leaders of the labor union engaged in a bitter dispute with the management of the luxury hotel that was gutted by fire here Wednesday insisted today that they had nothing to do with the fire, which some officials suggest may have been arson.|Leaders of the labor union engaged in a bitter dispute with the management of the luxury hotel that was gutted by fire here Wednesday insisted today that they had nothing to do with the fire, which some officials suggest may have been arson. Leaders of the labor union engaged in a bitter dispute with the management of the luxury hotel that was gutted by fire here Wednesday insisted today that they had nothing to do with the fire, which some officials suggest may have been arson. The fatal fire broke out in an empty hotel ballroom minutes after the union, Local 901 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, ended a meeting there about 3:30 P.M. One survivor, a 35-year-old Mexican woman, said a hotel cook told her the day before the fire that he was afraid of violence in the labor dispute and was not planning to work on New Year's Eve. Another survivor, Alfredo Vertz, a 38-year-old accountant from Elmhurst, Queens, said he had received an anonymous phone call in his room at 9:34 A.M., about six hours before the fire. Mr. Vertz, who grew up in Peru, said the caller, a woman speaking Spanish with what he thought sounded like a Puerto Rican accent, had said, ''I'm going to burn you and everyone else in the hotel.'' Optimism on Dispute Cited Mr. Vertz said he had reported the call to a clerk at the front desk and was told that several other guests had reported similar threatening calls but that there was nothing to worry about. Mr. Vertz was at a restaurant outside the hotel with his family when the fire started. Bruce Shulman, the hotel director, said threats had been made against the hotel, but he declined to say whether any had been made on Wednesday. The union leaders and perhaps a dozen rank-and-file members said that although they had unanimously rejected a new management offer, they had left the Wednesday meeting optimistic that a solution would be reached before a midnight strike deadline. ''The Secretary of Labor's office had offered to help us mediate, and the Tourist Office, too,'' Jose E. Cadiz, the secretary-treasurer and chief negotiator for the union, said at a news conference in his office this afternoon. The president of the local, Rene Rodriguez, said of the fire, ''We have no idea how this happened.'' The fire occurred as tourism in Puerto Rico is vigorously rebounding from nearly a decade in the doldrums, and many hotels, including the Dupont Plaza, have been running at near capacity. 'A Blow' to Tourism Hector Luis Acevedo, who as the Puerto Rico Secretary of State is the commonwealth's second-highest official, said in an interview that the fire ''obviously is a blow'' to the resurgence in tourism. Miguel A. Domenech, executive director of the commonwealth's Tourist Company, the government agency responsible for tourism, said that if investigators determined that the fire had been the work of arsonists the effect on tourism ''would be even worse'' than if it proved to be an accident. Mr. Cadiz of the teamsters said that over the last two weeks he concluded negotiations with two other hotels and the island's convention center and that he was so confident he would find a way out of the Dupont Plaza impasse that he had booked a seat on a flight to Philadelphia this afternoon for a vacation. He said he canceled the reservation this morning. ''I didn't think there was going to be a strike,'' said Victor Fernandez, a 38-year-old desk clerk and union delegate who attended the teamsters' meeting Wednesday. 'A Good Season' ''We got a hell of a good season and neither management nor we in the union were going to lose this season,'' he said. The union had voted on Dec. 22 to strike. Mr. Domenech of the Tourist Company said that he had offered several times to mediate the dispute, as recently as two days ago, but that both sides had told him they were too far apart. The union had been seeking a pay raise of $1.50 an hour over three years, and the hotel had been offering 90 cents, those familiar with the negotiations said. In addition, union officials said, the hotel was also proposing contract changes that would have permitted the replacement of about 60 union members with short-term, nonunion workers. The union leaders said that in the Wednesday meeting they had read aloud the latest proposal, in which the hotel increased its pay offer to $1 over three years. The leaders said several points members had previously objected to were accepted by the members and that the only remaining barrier to a solution was the section calling for the elimination of the union members' jobs. Hoping for Resolution ''We were really hoping we could resolve the conflict,'' Mr. Rodriguez said. Both Mr. Cadiz and Mr. Rodriguez repeatedly denied any involvement by themselves or any union member in the start of the fire. ''We trust in God it was an accident,'' Mr. Rodriguez said, ''for the sake of the tourist industry and for Puerto Rico.'' In a brief interview, Bruce Shulman, the hotel's vice president for sales and marketing, said he would not comment on whether he suspected the union. But he called attention to the afternoon meeting in the ballroom and said: ''The fire broke out in the ballroom.'' Mr. Cadiz of the teamsters said he had first learned of the fire in a telephone call at 3:50 P.M. ''A member said on the phone that there was a big fire at the Dupont Plaza and that people were jumping out the windows,'' he recalled. ''I couldn't believe it. I went right to the hotel. I had to see it to believe it.'' Mr. Domenech said that while there had been some strikes at hotels here in recent years, he could not recall any that had broken into violence. The teamster official said the unit at the Dupont Plaza was organized 22 years ago when the hotel was a member of the Sheraton chain. According to hotel officials, the Dupont Plaza had spent $700,000 on renovations and expansions that were to be completed in February.
