408|1987\01\02|STORM AND TIDES BATTER THE SOUTH AS SNOW HITS THE NEW YORK AREA|A winter storm, combined with unusually high tides and gale-force winds, caused extensive damage along the Southern coast yesterday before sweeping northward into the New York metropolitan area.|A winter storm, combined with unusually high tides and gale-force winds, caused extensive damage along the Southern coast yesterday before sweeping northward into the New York metropolitan area. A winter storm, combined with unusually high tides and gale-force winds, caused extensive damage along the Southern coast yesterday before sweeping northward into the New York metropolitan area. The New York area prepared for coastal flooding, icy roads and slow going in the rush hour this morning, as many commuters end their New Year's holiday. ''Stay at home, if at all possible,'' was the advice of Clifford Crowley, the meteorologist in charge of National Weather Service's New York City forecast office. The storm washed away decks and sidewalks yesterday at resort hotels on the South Carolina coast and flooded North Carolina beaches, damaging waterfront homes. The same tidal forces created the highest tides in nearly 20 years on the West Coast, forcing the closing of some coastal roads for the fourth day in a row. The Cause: Syzygy Tides worldwide, Mr. Crowley said, have been unusually high this week because of syzygy, a rare alignment of the Sun, Moon and Earth that increases gravitational pull. Furthermore, the Moon is at the point in its orbit nearest to the Earth. The Weather Service and Coast Guard officials last night issued coastal flood warniings from Virginia through New England. In addition, the Weather Service warned that the storm of heavy rain and snow would reach its peak in the New York area between 8 and 10 A.M. this morning, when tides will be at their highest in area waters. Casinos in Atlantic City were warned to get their employees to work before 7 A.M., ahead of the high tide. As a precaution, flat-bottom punts were flown in from St. Louis for possible evacuations, and the Coast Guard put extra crews on duty. ''We're now playing it up as a worst-case situation,'' said Jay Krieger, chief meterologist for the National Weather Service in Atlantic City. ''We will get some flooding. The question is how much.'' As much as four inches of snow had fallen in parts of northern Jersey and Rockland and Westchester Counties by 10 P.M. last night, with two inches reported on Long Island, according to the Westher Service. Mr. Crowley, who was watching the slow northward movement of the storm, said the accumulation of snow to the north and west of New York City and in Connecticut could reach 10 inches in inland areas. In the city, he said, two inches of snow were expected. Shortly before 11 P.M. last night, as roads filled with wet snow, the New York City Police Department issued a warning to motorists of ''hazardous driving conditions.'' Winds at 40 Miles an Hour Should the storm stall just to the east of the coast, ''it could snow all Friday and into Saturday,'' Mr. Crowley said. ''But if it comes straight at us up the coast, the snow should turn to rain.''.'' He said winds at the peak of the storm this morning should be 40 to 50 miles an hour, pushing the unusually high tides - already two to three feet above normal - still higher. In California, yesterday marked the fourth day that officials were forced to close a lane of the Pacific Coast Highway at Sunset Beach. No damage was reported. On the Washington State coast, a 50-year-old barn at a spot called Washaway Beach, near Grayland, slipped into the ocean Wednesday after high tides erorded its foundation. Power Out in North Carolina South Carolina beaches were littered with planks from boardwalks and with trees, but damage to buildings appeared to be less than that caused by a storm last month that left $3 million in damages, according to Patrick Dowling, public information officer for the city of Myrtle Beach, S.C. ''There has been substantial flooding, but no damage to condominiums or motels or hotels,'' Mr. Dowling said. Civil defense workers in South Carolina's coastal counties said it could take days to compile damage estimates. North Carolina officials reported extensive damage to waterfront homes at Long Beach, an island community near the state's southernmost tip. Earl Gilbert, a dispatcher for the Long Beach Police Department, said the situation was ''considerably worse than the December storm because of the exceptionally high tide and winds gusting to 50 miles an hour and heavy rain.'' In western North Carolina, the storm dropped as much as 10 inches of snow and left more than 18,000 people without electricity, the authorities said. Evacuation in Florida In Belle Glade, Fla., on the south shore of Lake Okeechobee, 40 people were evacuated when their mobile homes were damaged by high winds and a tornado. Eight people were treated for cuts and bruises at a local hospital, according to Russ Kocher, a nursing supervisor at the hospital. Eighteen trailer homes were overturned or destroyed, with damage estimated at $130,000, said Mark Phillips, a spokesman for the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Department. Because of the New Year's holiday, traffic on the major roads and highways throughout the New York metropolitan area was light when the wet snow began falling last night, officials said. ''Luckily we haven't had any serious problems,'' said Sgt. Charles Cossentino of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey's Police Department. He said air traffic at the city's three major aiports was also light because of the holiday. ''Most people seem to stay at home on New Year's Day,'' he said. Salt on the Roads More than 100 trucks operated by the New York City Department of Sanitation began spreading salt on the city's major arterial highways around 6 P.M. yesterday, according to Vito A. Turso, a spokesman for the department. ''We've also put an additional 300 workers on the midnight to 8 A.M. shift,'' he said. ''They'll either be removing snow, or collecting the backlog of New Year's Eve leftovers.'' He warned that if the snow did turn to rain overnight, there would probably be street flooding this morning. ''But we'll worry about that later,'' he said. High winds whipped rain mixed with snow across most of Long Island. Edgar Hultman, a meteorologist at the Weather Service in Manhattan, said, ''It's going to be a lousy day Friday morning.''
