410|1987\01\02|No Way to Interpret the Constitution|In the year ahead, we will be celebrating the 200th anniversary of our Constitution. We are also likely to see a continuation of last year's debate over the proper role of the judiciary in interpreting the Constitution.|In the year ahead, we will be celebrating the 200th anniversary of our Constitution. We are also likely to see a continuation of last year's debate over the proper role of the judiciary in interpreting the Constitution. In the year ahead, we will be celebrating the 200th anniversary of our Constitution. We are also likely to see a continuation of last year's debate over the proper role of the judiciary in interpreting the Constitution. Since it appears that judicial review is here to stay, some who remain troubled by it urge that at the very least the enterprise of judges deciding constitutional questions should be limited to discovering the intent of the Framers. This approach is advanced to reduce judicial discretion, to increase certainty and to assure that the dispute at hand will be resolved by reference to the document rather than the judges' personal predilections. I regard reliance on original intent to be a largely specious mode of interpretation. I often find it instructive to consult the Framers when I am called upon to interpret the Constitution, but it is the beginning of my inquiry, not the end. For not only is the quest for ''intent'' fraught with obstacles of a practical nature - notably that the Framers plainly never foresaw most of the problems that bedevil the courts today - it may also be more undemocratic than competing methods of construing the Constitution. If the search for ''intent'' sums up the constitutional enterprise, then current generations are bound not merely by general language but by specific conceptions frozen in time by men long dead. This problem did not escape the notice of the Founding Fathers. Thomas Jefferson wrote to James Madison ''that the earth belongs . . . to the living; that the dead have neither powers nor rights over it.'' He suggested that the Constitution expire naturally every 19 years, but the idea was rejected as unworkable. Noah Webster remarked that ''the very attempt to make perpetual constitutions, is the assumption of a right to control the opinions of future generations; and to legislate for those over whom we have as little authority as we have over a nation in Asia.'' The open-textured nature of most of the vital clauses of the Constitution signifies that the drafters expected future generations to adapt the language to modern circumstances, not to conduct judicial autopsies into the minds of the Framers. When the Founding Fathers talked about due process, equal protection and freedom of speech and religion, they were embracing general principles, not specific solutions. Another problem of the ''original intent'' approach is that it fails to deliver on its promise to constrain judicial discretion. In imagining that there is a discrete, discoverable intent behind even the most general constitutional phrases, courts are more apt to be led astray than when they employ less backward-looking approaches. Remember, it was Chief Justice Roger B. Taney who invoked the Framers' intent in Dred Scott, not Chief Justice Earl Warren in Brown v. Board of Education. Even if we could agree that original intent is the true source of constitutional meaning, we would be no better off. No complete and accurate record exists today to tell us what the founders thought. Even Madison's notes, the best record we have of the convention, were far from complete and never intended to serve as an authoritative record. He had other tasks that interfered with his secretarial responsibilities - not the least of which was to play a leading role in the debates. Some of the notes were written in the evening, still others after the convention adjourned. Years later, Madison revised the notes in places where they conflicted with the written recollections of other participants, but points of disagreement still exist. Yet even if we had a complete transcript of the proceedings, are there any so naive to think that we could harvest definitive answers? As with contemporary Congressional debates, we would encounter unresolved conflict, unexpected omissions and abundant ambiguity, both the deliberate variety designed to encourage compromise and the inevitable inadvertent kind. Another question to which I have never found a satisfactory answer is: Whose ''intent'' should we be trying to discover? The Constitution and amendments were ratified by state legislatures or conventions, and the ratifiers were more than 1,600 in number. Should we not consult the historian - or more accurately, the oracle - to see what they thought? More to the point, if the Constitution is truly a document of the people, why not attempt to find out what the electorate thought? Certainly, if ''original intent'' is a mechanism designed to reconcile judicial review with democratic theory, as its proponents maintain, it makes little sense to preoccupy ourselves with the ideas of the privileged few who had a hand in drafting the Constitution. Searching for the intent of the ratifiers or the people, however, is even more of a wild goose chase - particularly since the Constitution has since been thoroughly transformed as a result of the amendments made after the Civil War. In short, while judges should make every effort to learn what the Framers thought, such a quest cannot be expected to produce definitive answers. The Framers' legacy to modern times is the language and spirit of the Constitution, not the conflicting and dated conceptions that may lay beneath that language. It is always a terrifying realization to learn that our fathers are no longer walking beside us. But we must be content that they provided us with general guidance. Even if they cannot point the way with precision, their legacy can still guide us.
