414|1987\01\02|WHY NOT QUESTION THE PRESIDENCY?|On the one hand, Americans want to find out what really happened. On the other, we are told that if we look too hard and push too far we will cripple the Presidency, paralyze our Government, dismay our allies, embolden our adversaries and engage in pointless self-immolation before a bewildered world. Correction: January 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition|On the one hand, Americans want to find out what really happened. On the other, we are told that if we look too hard and push too far we will cripple the Presidency, paralyze our Government, dismay our allies, embolden our adversaries and engage in pointless self-immolation before a bewildered world. On the one hand, Americans want to find out what really happened. On the other, we are told that if we look too hard and push too far we will cripple the Presidency, paralyze our Government, dismay our allies, embolden our adversaries and engage in pointless self-immolation before a bewildered world. This is understandably the self-serving view of the Administration, which has its own reasons for wanting to put the Iran scandal behind it and move on to other things. It is also, rather predictably, a view that is gathering a measure of pundit support. It would be no surprise one of these days to read about a revival of the old Committee to Defend the Presidency formed in the Watergate era by agitated lawyers claiming that their interest lay in the preservation not of Richard M. Nixon but of the Presidential office itself. The America-can't-afford-a-crippled-Presidency view finds additional support abroad. Sophisticated foreigners tend to regard American zeal in ferreting out executive wrongdoing as one more proof of the incorrigible immaturity of the United States in a grown-up world. The French in particular cannot understand today, any more than they could in Watergate time, why the world's most powerful democracy commits so spectacular an art of self-destruction over so venial a transgression. When France sank the blameless Rainbow Warrior, the Greenpeace anti-nuclear protest ship, in New Zealand, killing one crew member, no Frenchman seemed to care whether the President or Prime Minister had authorized the crime. Perhaps they order such matters better in France. But let us first define the issue and assess the consequences. There are many differences between Watergate and whatever it is we finally choose to call the Iran-Nicaragua flimflam (Iragua? Irangate?). Watergate was domestic politics; this is foreign policy. The Watergate mob was out to destroy political opposition; the current crowd is out to save the world. But whatever the differences in motives, the two scandals raise the same fundamental question. That question is whether the President is above the Constitution and the laws. Americans may be forgiven for taking this question seriously. I remember the brilliant English historian Hugh Trevor-Roper explaining Watergate to a British audience by comparing it with the revolt against royal prerogative in 17th century England. When Hampden refused to pay ship money in 1636, the real issue was not ship money but the crown's claim to absolute power. Foreigners wondered then why the English made such a fuss about ship money when an unhampered English Government might have exerted much influence in Europe. ''But the English,'' Mr. Trevor-Roper wrote, ''thought first of their own liberties; and who shall say that they were wrong?'' The issue is only secondarily Iran and the contras. The underlying issue is whether Presidential prerogative should supersede the Constitution and the law. The next question is whether Americans, in thinking first of their own liberties, are really doing such serious damage to their own institutions and to the Republic's position in a dangerous world. The Presidency is plainly in trouble. But it is not in trouble because of what Congress and the press have done to the executive. It is in trouble because of what the President and his men have done to themselves. Even so, some pundits say, it will be hard to conduct foreign policy in the months ahead if Congress and the press persist in challenging the Administration's version of things; and, since this is the only Government we have, its incapacity will harm us all. But the international doubts about the Reagan Administration's credibility are not the result of Congressional and newspaper exposes. They are the consequence of the Administration's bad habit of solemnly declaring one line toward Iran, Libya and terrorism and pursuing the opposite line under the table. It is this wretched fact, not Congress or the press, that makes every foreign chancellery skeptical of the Administration's word. Nor will the Administration's incapacity in foreign affairs be remedied if Congress and the press should relapse tomorrow into statesmanlike and respectful silence. When an Administration's foreign policy is incoherent, duplicitous and dedicated to rash and mindless policies, what indeed is so awful about a crippled Presidency? Surely a crippled Presidency is far better for the nation and for the world than an unchastened and unrepentant one. Would even the French be happy to see Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North back in harness, his Presidential carte blanche restored? No Presidency deserves any more trust than it has earned. This Presidency, with its record of international recklessness, deserves to be kept strictly on the leash for the rest of its time in office. Let us hear no more about the horrors of a crippled Presidency. Still, some insist that crippling will do permanent damage to the office. That was the pious line of the Committee to Defend the Presidency a dozen years ago. I remember Prof. Charles L. Black Jr. of the Yale Law School arguing in Watergate days that if Mr. Nixon turned White House tapes over to the Congress it would mean a betrayal of his ''successors for all time to come.'' The tapes were turned over, and the Presidency survived. Mr. Nixon was driven from office, and the Presidency survived. The Presidency even flourished for a season under Mr. Reagan, until he, like Mr. Nixon, overreached - and provoked the appropriate constitutional retribution. Let's not worry about the Presidency. The office is indestructible if for no other reason than that our system cannot work without Presidential initiative. Presidents need protection less than the rest of us need protection from Presidents. The electorate's obligation is to demand executive accountability. The Constitution has never pretended to guarantee against Presidential incompetence, folly, stupidity or criminality. As the Supreme Court put it in a celebrated decision, the Republic has ''no right to expect that it will always have wise and humane rulers, sincerely attached to the principles of the Constitution. Wicked men, ambitious of power, with hatred of liberty and contempt of law, may fill the place once occupied by Washington and Lincoln.'' The Constitution cannot guarantee against that. But it can guarantee accountability. Through the separation of powers, it can guarantee that when a President abuses power, corrective forces exist to redress the constitutional balance. As Senator Sam Ervin put it in Watergate days, ''One of the great advantages of the three separate branches of Government is that it's difficult to corrupt all three at the same time.'' America should feel proud, not apologetic, about the present reaction against Reagan excess. That reaction is not a failure but a stirring vindication of American democracy. It is evidence of the determination of the admonition to future Presidents to respect their inaugural oath to execute the office faithfully and to preserve and protect the Constitution. Once a President permits reckless policies in defiance of the Constitution and the laws, he can expect precisely what is happening to President Reagan today. Americans think first of their own liberties - and who shall say that they are wrong? No one at home or abroad should be upset for a moment at the national determination to redress the balance of the Constitution. Quite the contrary: everyone should rejoice at this latest proof of the health and vitality of American democracy. The world will be far better off for it. Correction:  January 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition
