415|1987\01\02|STOCK STRENGTH PREDICTED...|On Aug. 13, 1982, with the nation stumbling out of a recession, the Federal Reserve Board used its vast powers over interest rates to try to bring the economy out of its slump, and in doing so touched off the Great Bull Market of the 1980's.|On Aug. 13, 1982, with the nation stumbling out of a recession, the Federal Reserve Board used its vast powers over interest rates to try to bring the economy out of its slump, and in doing so touched off the Great Bull Market of the 1980's. On Aug. 13, 1982, with the nation stumbling out of a recession, the Federal Reserve Board used its vast powers over interest rates to try to bring the economy out of its slump, and in doing so touched off the Great Bull Market of the 1980's. Four and a half years later, Wall Street is wondering whether the most successful millionaire maker of all time can continue to romp for at least one more year. And while there is seldom anything resembling a consensus in the investment community, many market experts are convinced that stock prices can continue to rise as long as interest rates go no higher than current levels. ''I'm reminded of that quote by Mae West, who said, 'Too much of a good thing is wonderful,' '' said John Hotchkis, whose firm, Hotchkis & Wiley in Los Angeles, is keeping the $2.5 billion it manages for 25 institutional investors almost entirely in the stock market. Dow Up 22.6% for Year Even though corporate earnings did not live up to expectations this past year, Wall Street triumphed, thanks in large part to some heady first-half gains, spurred by lower interest rates on competing bond investments. The Dow Jones industrial average, which tracks the action of 30 of the nation's biggest stocks, rose 22.6 percent in 1986, far outpacing the broader indexes of the New York, American and over-the-counter stock markets. The blue-chip Dow index even threatened to catapult through the vaunted 2,000 level during December, before pulling back. On Wednesday it closed at 1,895.95, not far off its record of 1,955.57 set Dec. 2. To put those numbers in perspective, the Dow closed at just 788.05 on that Friday in August 1982 when the Federal Reserve cut the discount rate, which is the all-important rate it charges its member banks for loans. In the 52 months since then, in what has become by some measures the second-best bull market in history both in terms of percentage gains and duration, investors have made an estimated $500 billion in paper profits from equities. That vast sum far surpasses any gains scored in such a span. A. C. Moore, head of research at Argus Research, for instance, is predicting that the stock market will climb 15 percent in 1987, which will correspond closely to the amount he thinks corporate earnings will rise. But Mr. Moore believes most of the gain will come in the latter part of the year. In early 1987, he fears, stock prices will come under pressure because of poor economic conditions. 'It Won't Last Forever' Yet even the most ardent supporters of the market realize stock prices go in both directions. As Mr. Hotchkis put it: ''It won't last forever. We still live in a cyclical world, and no one has yet found the whereabouts of the tooth fairy.'' The cycle that people are most worried about these days is an economic one. Even with the Federal Reserve combating softness in the nation's economy through a friendly monetary policy, corporations for the most part are still reporting mediocre profits. The Standard & Poor's Corporation predicts that moderate to good earnings growth will be experienced by the retailing industry, banking, drugs, insurance and microcomputer software companies. A turnaround will take place, it predicts, for computer makers and the closely related semiconductor industry. Staying in the dumps, it believes, will be the auto and oil industries, while profits for the military industry will remain at about this year's levels. Brokerage Recommendations Brokerage firms, as always, differ on where to invest in 1987. Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., for instance, is recommending the home-building industry, as well as paper and forest products stocks. In those groups, it likes Georgia-Pacific, Great Northern Nekoosa, Hovnanian Enterprises, Kaufman & Broad, Lennar Corporation and Ryland Group. Among other stocks it finds attractive are Anheuser-Busch, the beer maker; Arkansas Best, a trucking company, and Gannett, a newspaper publisher. But Wall Street is also keeping a wary eye on other things. Insider trading scandals and tax reform, although monumental news events in 1986, may not yet have had a full-blown impact on the stock market. And new trading techniques - notably the split-second programs used by professionals to participate simultaneously in futures, options and stocks - could have an even more profound effect on who is willing to play the market in the years to come. ''We are in a bull market, but we have not had the traditional third leg of the bull market,'' said Allen Sinai, chief economist with Shearson Lehman Brothers, the investment firm, who predicts the next upturn will still occur. ''The reason has been disappointing economic growth and disappointing profits.'' Growth Estimates Lower More than 50 economists recently surveyed by Eggert Economic Enterprises Inc. of Sedona, Ariz., estimate, furthermore, that the nation's real gross national product will rise a modest 2.5 percent in 1987. In the middle of 1986, those same economists were predicting more energetic G.N.P. growth of 3.5 percent. Standard & Poor's, whose stock indexes are some of the most carefully watched on Wall Street, said corporate profits improved just 11.2 percent during 1986. That was far below the 20-percent-or-so rise the 500 companies that make up S.&P.'s biggest index had been expected to enjoy. The early prediction for 1987: a 20 percent profit jump. Profits in the stock market, meanwhile, have been so enormous that some experts fear they cannot continue to grow - especially without getting a forceful assist from a better economy. 'More Than People Expected' Said Leonard Heine Jr., who manages $1 billion worth of other people's money through the Management Asset Corporation, based in Westport, Conn.: ''1986 was so much more than people expected, and it was due primarily to the destruction of interest rates. People were looking for places to put money. And I don't think any of us, in our wildest dreams, anticipated a market reaching 2,000 by the end of 1986.'' Lower interest rates help the stock market to divert money from competing investments. Indeed, money has come out of low-paying certificates of deposit and money market funds, for instance, and gone into stocks. But there is little evidence that corporate profits are picking up a windfall from lower credit costs. 'A Very Sluggish Economy' ''Nowhere do we see any fundamentals that support a market staying at this level,'' said Mr. Heine. ''You have, to say the least, a very sluggish economy.'' Taking a slightly broader historical view, however, might justify the gains. ''If you look at it in the longer-term context, by taking into account the fact that the market was so weak during the late 1960's and all during the 70's, I think you would draw a slightly different conclusion,'' said Lawrence Chimerine, chief economist of Chase Econometrics of Bala Cynwyd, Pa. ''To some extent, I think we are just catching up to a weak and undervalued stock market in those prior years.'' The biggest mystery of 1987, market experts agree, will be the insider-trading scandals that have rocked Wall Street. Nearly everyone expects the Securities and Exchange Commission's lasso to catch others who might have helped Ivan F. Boesky, the now deposed king of Wall Street arbitragers, illegally reap enormous profits on corporate takeovers. Effect on Corporate Takeovers But the Boesky situation could end up having its biggest effect on corporate takeovers, which have proved very profitable these last few years not only for Wall Street professionals but also for the average investor who happens to find himself holding stock in a company that gets bought out. The takeover binge - which caused such well-known concerns as RCA, Celanese, Chesebrough-Ponds and Richardson-Vicks to be betrothed to other companies - has been propelled, in large part, by the easy availability of takeover financing. And one reason money has been so available is the growth of the high-yield junk bond market, which has been pioneered by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Now Drexel and some of its executives find themselves under investigation in the Boesky case. If anything comes of that investigation, despite Drexel's insistence that it knows of no wrongdoing, the firm's ability to sell junk bonds could be impaired, and the takeover explosion could be muffled in the years ahead. A Slower Pace Expected But even without such an impact, the trend of corporate takeovers will probably continue at a somewhat slower pace. ''I think you are going to see them,'' said Robert Pirie, head of Rothschild Inc., an investment firm that has been an adviser on corporate takeovers. ''You are going to see big ones, but nothing like the volume you've seen in the last three or four months.'' Takeovers were particularly heavy late in 1986 as companies raced to expand, contract or restructure before the new tax laws took effect on Jan. 1. But the tax laws may also have an impact on the kinds of stocks that investors are willing to buy. Market experts say the new laws, which eventually will treat the gains won when a stock goes up in price the same way as a paycheck, will probably cause investors to take fewer risks. That might mean a rebirth for good, safe stocks that pay predictable dividends. ''I think that in general, with the change in the tax structure, many people will change their philosophy in investing,'' said Barry Salzberg, a partner in charge of executive financial counseling at the accounting firm of Deloitte Haskins & Sells. Investors will have to be pretty certain, he said, that the gains that will be achieved on a particular stock will offset the extra tax.
