430|1987\01\02|To Hoop Fans, It's a Capital Idea|Washington-area basketball fans are in imminent danger of a television overdose, and the blame can't be laid to CBS, NBC or even ESPN. The culprit is WNVC, Channel 56, in Falls Church, Va., a commercial-free outlet that covers Capitol Hill and affairs of state by day, then bombards its viewers with college play once the sun goes down.|Washington-area basketball fans are in imminent danger of a television overdose, and the blame can't be laid to CBS, NBC or even ESPN. The culprit is WNVC, Channel 56, in Falls Church, Va., a commercial-free outlet that covers Capitol Hill and affairs of state by day, then bombards its viewers with college play once the sun goes down. Washington-area basketball fans are in imminent danger of a television overdose, and the blame can't be laid to CBS, NBC or even ESPN. The culprit is WNVC, Channel 56, in Falls Church, Va., a commercial-free outlet that covers Capitol Hill and affairs of state by day, then bombards its viewers with college play once the sun goes down. ''We're sort of a cross between C-SPAN and ESPN,'' says Matt Miller, production manager for WNVC and its sister station, WNVT (Channel 53), which, between them, will carry more than 200 games this season. Viewer demand for the games springs partly from the fact that most of the capital still hasn't been wired for cable, leaving a nighttime sports vacuum that the two stations are happy to exploit. Though both are publicly owned, neither is a member of the Public Broadcasting Service, and their lack of such PBS mainstays as ''Masterpiece Theater'' is fine with hoop fanatics, who could barely be better served by satellite dishes in their own backyard. The twin stations have six dishes - three with ''splitter'' capabilities to take in more than one game simultaneously - and can thus blanket the Washington area with live and taped coverage of all the major conferences and such popular independents as Louisville, Marquette and Notre Dame. The stations spend between $2,000 and $3,000 a game on rights fees, which are paid for by the viewers. Since there are no commercials, a timeout on the court allows a return to the studios for that sine qua non of public TV, the pledge break. Surplus from the pledges winds up in general operating funds, in effect subsidizing such non-sport activity as the telecast of the State Department's daily press briefing. The system has proved so successful that in the year just ended, WNVC added some 70 college football games to its schedule, as well as college hockey and a weekly two-hour sports call-in show. Though Channels 53 and 56 are now well into the season's coverage, the best - or at least the most - is yet to come. Commercial-free basketball ends this year just before the start of the national tournament with the second annual WNVC college basketball marathon - 35 consecutive hours of play from Friday afternoon to Saturday midnight. Tipoff is at 1 P.M., March 6. SCOUTING
