434|1987\01\02|POP AND JAZZ GUIDE|Borbetomagus, Alchemical Theater, 539 East 13th Street, between Avenues A and B (529-4783). Two saxophonists, a guitarist and a bassist take the turbulence and friction of high-energy jazz to a startling yet perfectly logical extreme. Borbetomagus is a wailing wall of sound, more adventure than entertainment.|Borbetomagus, Alchemical Theater, 539 East 13th Street, between Avenues A and B (529-4783). Two saxophonists, a guitarist and a bassist take the turbulence and friction of high-energy jazz to a startling yet perfectly logical extreme. Borbetomagus is a wailing wall of sound, more adventure than entertainment. Borbetomagus, Alchemical Theater, 539 East 13th Street, between Avenues A and B (529-4783). Two saxophonists, a guitarist and a bassist take the turbulence and friction of high-energy jazz to a startling yet perfectly logical extreme. Borbetomagus is a wailing wall of sound, more adventure than entertainment. The group performs at 8 P.M. on Sunday. Admission is $4. Mario Rivera and the Salsa Refugees, Sounds of Brazil, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street (243-4940). The saxophonist Mario Rivera has been an important sideman and soloist with many of Latin music's brightest stars. But he was also a charter member of the jazz saxophonist George Coleman's formidable octet in the 1970's. His Salsa Refugees invariably include some of the leading Latin-jazz musicians in town, but in recent years, Mr. Rivera has been drawing on his roots in the Dominican Republic. Hot, crisp polyrhythms that are increasingly colored by Afro-Dominican tradition, a bit of Cuban flavor, and straight-ahead jazz blend naturally and bewitchingly in his bands. He is playing tonight around 11 P.M., 1 A.M. and 2:30 A.M. For admission prices, call the club. Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785). The original Jazz Messengers, a big band, made its debut in 1947, and Art Blakey, the consummate modern-jazz drummer, has been putting together strong, hard-swinging bands ever since. Who could have imagined that the 1980's would find him on a roll, introducing one significant new jazz talent after another (Wynton and Branford Marsalis, Bill Pierce, Bobby Watson, James Williams, Wallace Roney, and on and on and on)? Catch him while he's hot. The Messengers are at Sweet Basil through Sunday, with shows around 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. There is a $12 cover and $6 minimum. Rock Album of the Week: ''Pusherman EP,'' Live Skull (Homestead). With each new record, New York's Live Skull delivers a more concentrated brand of emotional intensity, a more ferociously disciplined sonic assault. Live Skull's instrumentation -two guitars, bass and drums - is the only thing generic about the band. The guitarists, Mark C. and Tom Paine, play parts so tightly meshed and intricately lapidary, their two instruments sound as one. Marnie Greenholz's bass and James Lo's drums draw on the evolving urban rhythms of rap and funk, but their beats are artfully scrambled, and stripped down for maximum power-drive. Playing as a unit, Live Skull builds up layered patterns of deliberate harmonic distortion, sawtooth-wave interference patterns, and other electro-acoustical phenomena with painterly attention to shape and color. And they deliver all of this within the context of tightly structured songs. For this listener, Live Skull's music - a high-wire act played for keeps, without a net - is as challenging, as spiritually corrosive, and ultimately as transcendent as Albert Ayler's mid-60's free-jazz or the implacable drone-dance of the early Velvet Underground. It's one of the essential sounds of our time.
