442|1987\01\03|Bank to Help U.S. on Loans|Chemical Bank said yesterday that it had been appointed financial adviser for the Education Department's proposed program to sell loans. The program is part of the Federal Government's plan to reduce the budget deficit this year by selling assets, As financial adviser, Chemical Bank would help the department prepare the financial disclosure documents, and offer advice on the best way for distributing the loans through securities dealers.|Chemical Bank said yesterday that it had been appointed financial adviser for the Education Department's proposed program to sell loans. The program is part of the Federal Government's plan to reduce the budget deficit this year by selling assets, As financial adviser, Chemical Bank would help the department prepare the financial disclosure documents, and offer advice on the best way for distributing the loans through securities dealers. Chemical Bank said yesterday that it had been appointed financial adviser for the Education Department's proposed program to sell loans. The program is part of the Federal Government's plan to reduce the budget deficit this year by selling assets, As financial adviser, Chemical Bank would help the department prepare the financial disclosure documents, and offer advice on the best way for distributing the loans through securities dealers. The department plans to sell $579 million worth of direct Federal loans that were made to colleges and universities for housing or academic facilities since the early 1950's. There is no Federal guarantee behind the loans. Interest rates on the loans average about 3 1/8 percent and would be subject to Federal income tax. Selection of the loans to be sold would not be completed until the borrowing institutions have a chance to pay off their loans at a discount. Loans from the College Housing Program would be selected from a $2.1 billion pool of 3,000 separate loans to 1,200 institutions. David Dexter, a spokesman for the Education Department, said the Government still makes about $40 million to $60 million of new college housing loans annually. Other loans for sale will be selected from the Academic Facilities Loan program's $350 million portfolio of 600 loans to 300 institutions.
