447|1987\01\03|Bard, Thou Never Did It|I have been looking for an occasion to write the word ''clinchpoop'' ever since stumbling over it in Joseph T. Shipley's ''The Origins of English Words.'' He describes it as ''an old term for a boor.'' That's the ''boor'' who is synonymous with ''churl, lout, clown, bumpkin, clodhopper, hick, yokel and rube,'' and not the ''bore'' who makes your eyes glaze over.|I have been looking for an occasion to write the word ''clinchpoop'' ever since stumbling over it in Joseph T. Shipley's ''The Origins of English Words.'' He describes it as ''an old term for a boor.'' That's the ''boor'' who is synonymous with ''churl, lout, clown, bumpkin, clodhopper, hick, yokel and rube,'' and not the ''bore'' who makes your eyes glaze over. I have been looking for an occasion to write the word ''clinchpoop'' ever since stumbling over it in Joseph T. Shipley's ''The Origins of English Words.'' He describes it as ''an old term for a boor.'' That's the ''boor'' who is synonymous with ''churl, lout, clown, bumpkin, clodhopper, hick, yokel and rube,'' and not the ''bore'' who makes your eyes glaze over. I don't like ''boor.'' It's an irrational prejudice. Writers have them, and antipathy to ''boor'' is one of mine. ''Lout'' is my favorite among the synonyms above, which are lifted from Webster's Third. ''Churl'' is pretty good, but too cute if what you have in mind is a prime ''lout.'' I dislike ''bumpkin,'' ''clodhopper,'' ''hick,'' ''yokel'' and ''rube'' and rarely use them, probably because they all come close to some truth about myself that I'd rather not confront. ''Clinchpoop'' is a word that challenges writers to find the perfect setting for it. Henry Adams found a splendid setting for ''boors'' when he wrote ''Love makes gentlemen even of boors.'' If, however, he had written ''Love makes gentlemen even of clinchpoops,'' we would fault him for writing too clangorously. ''Clang,'' incidentally, descends from the same Indo-European root (''kleg'') that sired ''clinchpoop,'' according to Dr. Shipley. The difficulty of finding a setting for ''clinchpoop'' may explain why the Oxford English Dictionary lists it as obsolete. The last instance the O.E.D. finds of anyone writing ''clinchpoop'' was in 1589. Imagine: not even Shakespeare could find a way to use it artfully. Nor Donne, Dryden, Pope, Dr. Johnson, Burke nor any other top-drawer writer right up to George Bernard Shaw and Red Smith. About five paragraphs back, I called something ''pretty good,'' and felt guilty about it. Someone authoritative has written that good writers don't use ''pretty'' in this way. I do it often, even though I know better. This is another prejudice at work. I am partial to the indefinite modifier, which I studied at the knee of my Uncle Bruce, who measured all distances in terms of right goodness. A stranger asking him ''How far is it to the schoolhouse?'' was told ''It's a right good piece.'' Asked ''How far is it to California?'' Uncle Bruce, who lived in Virginia, might have been a bit more precise, saying ''Oh, well now, that's a right good piece, a right smart distance out there.'' Notice that the second sentence of the previous paragraph runs on into two relative clauses: ''which I studied'' and ''who measured all distances.'' I normally avoid sentences like that because they feel like they're running out of breath. The trick is to chop them into short, snappy sentences, but doing so in this case would create a hopelessly wrong sense of Uncle Bruce, whose manner was leisured rather than short and choppy, probably because he lived and died without ever seeing a television commercial. While revealing these writers' secrets, I may as well explain that, yes, it's courting trouble with your English teacher to write, as in the above paragraph, that long sentences ''feel like they're running out of breath.'' Rule makers prefer ''feel as if,'' and I usually write by the rules. Suppose, though, that you were a long sentence, running maybe a page or two in Gibbon's ''Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.'' Imagine somebody calling to you right after you had hurdled the third semicolon: ''How do you feel, pal?'' I submit that if you're a sentence with any blood at all in your veins you gasp ''Like I'm running out of breath,'' and not ''as if I'm etcetera.'' Somebody who wrote magically -possibly H.L. Mencken - dealt with the problem of when and when not to be grammatically correct by hypothesizing that he heard a knock at his door and asked, ''Who's there?'' Should the knocker reply, ''It's me'' or ''It is I''? ''Anybody who replies, 'It is I,' '' said this magical writer (possibly Mencken), ''doesn't get into my house.'' In short, to write well you ought to know when it's wrong to be right. More personal prejudices: I refuse to find out what ''hermeneutics'' and ''semiotic'' mean, and I never write words whose meanings I know if I can't pronounce them (''paradigm'' and ''eschatological,'' for instance), yet I often use words whose pronunciations please me, even though I don't know their meanings (''ineffable'' and ''egregious,'' for example). Finally, I never start writing until I know what I want to do. In this column, for example, I wanted to do something Shakespeare couldn't: use the word ''clinchpoop'' gracefully. OBSERVER
