448|1987\01\03|Crude Closes Above $18; Meat Up, Grains Lower|Crude oil futures prices closed above $18 a barrel yesterday for the first time since last January.|Crude oil futures prices closed above $18 a barrel yesterday for the first time since last January. Crude oil futures prices closed above $18 a barrel yesterday for the first time since last January. On other markets, livestock and meat futures moved higher, Treasury bond futures rose sharply and soybeans and grains were mostly lower. The last time crude oil futures prices settled above $18 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange was last Jan. 31. ''The market continues to rally based on the OPEC agreement,'' said Andrew Lebow, an analyst in New York with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. The agreement reached last month calls for a 7.6 percent cut in production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries during the first half of 1987. West Texas Intermediate crude oil settled 2 cents lower to 19 cents higher with the February contract at $18.13 a barrel. Heating oil was 0.10 cent lower to 0.76 cent higher with February at 50.71 cents a gallon; unleaded gasoline was 0.39 cent to 0.53 cent higher, with February at 49.73 cents a gallon. 'A Rally in a Bear Market' The rise in livestock prices was essentially ''a rally in a bear market'' at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, said Charlie Richardson, an analyst in Denver with Lind-Waldock. ''The beef market had been sharply lower early this week, and traders figured that after they had taken $4 to $5 off, the odds would be that they would put $2 back on before taking any more off,'' he said. As a result, he said, some traders on the futures market who had sold borrowed contracts in anticipation of a price decline turned into buyers. Despite yesterday's advances, Mr. Richardson said, ''it's difficult for anybody to be bullish'' because of the increased numbers of animals expected to be marketed during the first quarter. Grain and soybean futures prices were mostly lower in quiet trading on the Chicago Board of Trade. Analysts said larger deliveries of beans against the January contract put pressure on soybean prices. Weighing on the market in general was the expectation of large increases in the amounts of corn and soybeans that farmers will be selling in the coming weeks. The belief is that farmers have been holding back selling beans and corn until they could take advantage of the lower tax rates of 1987. FUTURES/OPTIONS
