449|1987\01\03|GOING OUT GUIDE|NOTES FROM ABROAD Followers hereabout of traditional Irish fiddling believe that, first of all, Irish fiddling is the ultimate form of the art. It is, they say, technically superior to most European fiddling and musically more imaginative. . And second, New York is the Irish fiddling capital of the Western Hemisphere.|NOTES FROM ABROAD Followers hereabout of traditional Irish fiddling believe that, first of all, Irish fiddling is the ultimate form of the art. It is, they say, technically superior to most European fiddling and musically more imaginative. . And second, New York is the Irish fiddling capital of the Western Hemisphere. NOTES FROM ABROAD Followers hereabout of traditional Irish fiddling believe that, first of all, Irish fiddling is the ultimate form of the art. It is, they say, technically superior to most European fiddling and musically more imaginative. . And second, New York is the Irish fiddling capital of the Western Hemisphere. In the 1920's and 30's, for example, local Irish fiddling proponents performing on records, the old 78's, had a profound affect on the sound of Irish fiddling locally and in Ireland. The Eagle Tavern is to Irish fiddling what Madison Square Garden is to heavyweight boxing, and tonight two prominent fiddlers will harmonize at the tavern. Paddy Reynolds left Garvary, Ballinamuck, in County Longford some 40 years ago. He came to the Bronx and in the 1950's built a reputation by performing at weddings and dances. His playing represents the New York style of fiddling. His partner this evening will be Brian Conway. Mr. Conway was born in the Bronx and last year won the All-Ireland fiddling championship. The duets will be performed at 9 and 10:30 P.M. Admission is $5. The Eagle Tavern is at 14th Street and Ninth Avenue. For further information, call 924-0275. BETTER LATE . . . Tonight is the unofficial opening night for the American Jewish Theater's second production of the season. ''Panache!,'' a comedy by Ron Mark, tells the story of an actor in the Yiddish Theater who was deprived of an opportunity to play a role he coveted, Cyrano de Bergerac. Now, at age 68, he gets his chance.  Sam Gray plays the actor. Yusef Bulos, Sol Frieder, Steve Gilborn, Richard Parnell Haversham, Ann Sachs and Rebecca Schull are also in the cast. Stanley Brechner directs. Curtain time is 8 P.M. Henceforth, performances will be Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M. The official opening is Jan. 15. Admission is $18.50. The American Jewish Theater of the 92d Street Y is at 1395 Lexington Avenue, at 92d Street. Information: 427-6000, extension 100. LAST CALL This weekend the Queens Museum offers the final opportunity to view a historic exhibition of drawings, ''American Masters: Works on Paper From the Corcoran Gallery of Art.'' This show is a display of drawings in pencil, charcoal, chalk, watercolor and gouache by more than 50 major American artists. The drawings include studies for paintings and personal sketches from notebooks as well as finished works. The Hudson River and ashcan schools, and Pop, Conceptual, Realist and Neo-Expressionist movements are all represented. Among the artists whose works are on view are Winslow Homer, John Singleton Copley, Thomas Cole, John Frederick Kensett, Childe Hassam and Maurice Prendergast. The Queens Museum is open today and tomorrow from noon to 5:30 P.M. Admission for adults is $1, and for the elderly and students, 50 cents. The museum is in the New York City building in Flushing Meadows. Information: (718) 592-2405. SURREAL HISTORIAN Daile Kaplan is active in photography as a curator and photo historian. She worked as a photo researcher with the United Methodist Church, the American Red Cross and the Library of Congress. She has lectured and written on photography. She wrote ''Lewis Hine, Assignment Europe.'' She also takes pictures. Ms. Kaplan has been photographing for a relatively brief period, 10 years, and she calls her latest work ''water landscapes.'' In an exhibition that opens today at the Fourth Street Photo Gallery she displays a dozen surreal color photographs made in Sicily and other parts of Italy. The exhibition closes Jan. 31. The gallery is at 67 East Fourth Street. An opening reception will be today from 6 to 8 P.M. The regular weekend hours are Saturday, 3 to 10 P.M. and Sunday, 2 to 8 P.M. For information, call 673-1021. Entertainment Events is on page 13
