450|1987\01\03|Books of The Times; A Feuding Family|A WRESTLING SEASON. By Sharon Sheehe Stark. 359 pages. William Morrow & Company. $17.95. To the local Pennsylvania Dutch farmers, the Kleeves are an odd, heretical band of outsiders obsessed with possessions and things. They stood, thinks their handyman, as ''a single slipshod strangeness, united against him and his, indifferent to the plight of their surroundings, undeserving, finally, of a single nugget of Bauscher County mud.|A WRESTLING SEASON. By Sharon Sheehe Stark. 359 pages. William Morrow & Company. $17.95. To the local Pennsylvania Dutch farmers, the Kleeves are an odd, heretical band of outsiders obsessed with possessions and things. They stood, thinks their handyman, as ''a single slipshod strangeness, united against him and his, indifferent to the plight of their surroundings, undeserving, finally, of a single nugget of Bauscher County mud. A WRESTLING SEASON. By Sharon Sheehe Stark. 359 pages. William Morrow & Company. $17.95. To the local Pennsylvania Dutch farmers, the Kleeves are an odd, heretical band of outsiders obsessed with possessions and things. They stood, thinks their handyman, as ''a single slipshod strangeness, united against him and his, indifferent to the plight of their surroundings, undeserving, finally, of a single nugget of Bauscher County mud.'' Though Sharon Sheehe Stark is interested in examining their ''corporate, symphonic'' identity - ''the then and now'' of their shared life -the Kleeves themselves experience little unity of kinship or purpose. To each of them, love is something that separates as much as it binds: they measure their identity by the distance they've traveled from home and parents and parcel out affection grudgingly - more as blackmail or a sign of weakness than a real show of caring. Forever bickering and exchanging blows, they use their intimate knowledge of one another's habits and verbal stratagems to sabotage the very harmony they say they crave. Sometimes the violence is physical - wassail bowls are smashed, creche figures broken. Sometimes it is verbal - insults are traded, hurtful truths lobbed. Most of the time, it is simply threatened. People are constantly threatening to leave in this novel: doors are slammed, cars are driven off into the night, and while the departures are usually brief, the prospect of permanent disengagement hangs over the Kleeve household like a stubborn and insidious fog. Louise Kleeve, we're told, is constantly on the verge of divorcing her husband, Trover. She is fed up with his refusal to talk about his feelings, disgusted with his penchant for buying unnecessary things - extra cars, unwanted exercise equipment (barbells, lifting bench, punching bag, exercycle, chest expander, gravity boots and the like), unread self-help books and unused carpentry tools. As for Trover, he says he's nearly had it with Louise's nagging. He is tired of her messiness and alienation; and her frequently flouted knowledge of his weaknesses scares him further into withdrawal. ''You're always counting something, calories, reps, heartbeats,'' she says to him one evening. ''God, he thought. Unmasked again. She kept summing him up in ever shorter sentences. You're always counting something. Four words. He'd have to change, reshuffle himself, burrow deeper into his own mystery.'' Caught in the crossfire between their parents are the two Kleeve children: the feisty, no-nonsense Mighty (nee Mary Ann) and her melancholic brother, Michael, a high-school wrestling champ. ''Louise saw her children then, and she saw them now,'' writes Ms. Stark. ''The days between carried too much muddy weather to see through. Things changed as you slept. While you were digging dirt out of grooves and flirting with poets and botany, your children traded natures like baseball cards.'' As she demonstrated in a previous collection of fiction (''The Dealers' Yard and Other Stories''), Ms. Stark has a talent for finding those moments in which hidden currents of feeling gather themselves into startling emotional eddies; and she demonstrates a knack as well for making the physical world yield handfuls of glittering similes and metaphors. Louise looks at Trover and realizes that ''hurt always bleached the blue from his eyes.'' And Trover attempts to hide from his sorrows in bed, hoping ''sleep would burn up grief like diesel.'' Yet as often as Ms. Stark's poetic prose succeeds in moving us, it just as frequently bloats into static overwriting. ''There was bile in his heart and cold in the crypt that was his stomach, and he rode a tractor inadequate to its task,'' she writes of one character. And she has another character actually utter these words: ''There I was, staring into endless, measureless everything, and all around me the simple finitudes were piling up.'' The self-conscious, writerly feeling of ''A Wrestling Season'' is not confined to its prose, but also extends to its overall thematic patterning. The title itself refers to the sport favored by the Kleeve's son, Michael; but it is also meant as a kind of extended metaphor for the squabbling engaged in by all the family's members. Similarly, Louise Kleeve's hobby -sculpting clay figurines, arranged in awkward family groupings - is meant to comment on their own precarious kinship: a stiffness in their carriage represents the Kleeves's difficulties in communication; broken and cracked limbs, their own emotional damage. There is a dangerous cuteness in such conceits; and as ''A Wrestling Season'' progresses, its whimsy grows more and more annoying, to the point where the novel begins to read like a pastiche of bad John Updike and bad John Irving. Instead of using her lyrical gifts to give the reader a sustained sense of her characters' interior lives, the author increasingly settles for nestling occasional emotional epiphanies in a wordy matrix of domestic sentiment and jokey set pieces. As Trover's buying sprees and family feuds take on the slapstick feel of a television game show, the characters start to resemble the corny figurines sculpted by Louise - and the reader ends by wondering why he should care about them or their problems. It's an unfortunate comment on a novel that contains such encouraging moments.
