451|1987\01\03|DOW GREETS '87 WITH 31.36 SPURT|A market rally yesterday that was as powerful as any of the last month gave Wall Street a rousing debut for the new year.|A market rally yesterday that was as powerful as any of the last month gave Wall Street a rousing debut for the new year. A market rally yesterday that was as powerful as any of the last month gave Wall Street a rousing debut for the new year. The Dow Jones industrial average, which has been laboring under selling motivated by the new tax law, broke out of its slump by rising 31.36 points, to 1,927.31. It was the best performance since the blue-chip index rose more than 43 points on Dec. 2. ''It's nice to get off to a good start,'' one trader said. More important to others was that the rally began to answer some important questions as to why the market had been stumbling of late. ''I think it's a big relief that the tremendous weakness in the broad market that we've seen in the last couple of weeks was, absolutely, tax selling,'' said Jon Groveman, a market analyst with Ladenburg, Thalmann & Company. ''The test will come Monday.'' The broader market did even better than the Dow. On the New York Stock Exchange, there were 1,483 issues that rose in price, compared with only 164 that declined. A Fast Start Market analysts have been predicting that 1987 will be a good year for the stock market if interest rates fall or remain at current levels, and corporate profits improve. But the general feeling was that stock prices would perform best later in the year, when many experts see business conditions improving. Yesterday, however, those on Wall Street who showed up for the first session of the year seemed eager to get the ball rolling. After just 30 minutes of trading, the Dow was up 22 points. The fast start, experts said, was inspired in part by an improvement in bond prices. But especially helpful was a sharp jump in the price of stock index futures. ''The futures opened at huge premiums to the stocks,'' said Donald Selkin of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. ''So the price of stocks had to be re-evaluated upward to put them in line with the futures.'' Often when the prices of stock index futures become too high, investors switch gears, buying stocks and selling the futures. That, analysts said, was what happened yesterday morning. The Dow's move yesterday nearly salvaged the holiday-shortened week, with the index losing just 3.09 points in the last four trading days. Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 4.28 points yesterday, to 246.45, while the New York Stock Exchange composite index gained 2.43, to 141.01. Volume Low The average share was up 65 cents. Trading volume, however, dropped to 91.9 million shares from Wednesday's 139.2 million. The day after New Year's, however, proved to be a much busier session than the day after Christmas, when fewer than 49 million shares changed hands. Laszlo Birinyi, manager of equity market analysis for Salomon Brothers, believes a lot of the trading volume on Wednesday and earlier in the week came from investors trying to beat the change in the capital gains tax rate. On Wednesday, for instance, odd-lot trades, which generally are made by small investors, accounted for 1.5 percent of the total volume, according to Mr. Birinyi. Normally, he said, these small trades account for less than 1 percent of the activity. Market experts had been predicting that investors, faced with a higher tax rate on their capital gains under the new tax law, would be heavy sellers of stock before the end of 1986. And while the harmful effect on the market was not as large as many had predicted, there was a sense during the last few weeks that Wall Street was facing an uphill struggle until the year ended. The Dow did fall in the three final sessions of 1986. Volatility Expected ''I think you will still have a year of high volatility,'' said Alan Ackerman of Herzfeld & Stern. ''The key to the market in 1987 is going to be interest rates.'' Also helpful, he said, will be low inflation and plenty of cash looking for a place to be invested. The three most heavily traded issues yesterday will all be traded ex-dividend on Monday. Public Service of Colorado topped the active list, rising 1/8, to 18 7/8, on consolidated volume of 7 million shares. Second was BellSouth, up 1 7/8, to 59 5/8. Illinois Power, third, was unchanged at 29 3/8. Lower interest rates also helped other former A.T.&T. companies. Southwest Bell gained 1 7/8, to 114 1/8, in active trading, while Nynex rose 1 5/8, to 65 3/4. There is also a feeling on Wall Street that these companies will soon be permitted to enter new businesses and receive rate increases. I.B.M., which had been leading the market lower recently, reversed direction yesterday, climbing 2 points, to 122. Merck rose 2 1/8, to 126. The pharmaceutical company's stock has been one of the bright spots in the last few weeks, helped by optimistic prospects for a cholesterol drug it is developing. The American Stock Exchange index rose 4.22, to 267.49, and in over-the-counter trading the Nasdaq index rose 4.43, to 353.26.
