452|1987\01\03|UNIONS PRESSURING CHIRAC AS RAIL STRIKE GOES ON|With rail workers rejecting Government proposals to end a crippling 15-day-old strike, a battle of wills seemed to be shaping up today between the main leftist French labor unions and the conservative Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac.|With rail workers rejecting Government proposals to end a crippling 15-day-old strike, a battle of wills seemed to be shaping up today between the main leftist French labor unions and the conservative Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac. With rail workers rejecting Government proposals to end a crippling 15-day-old strike, a battle of wills seemed to be shaping up today between the main leftist French labor unions and the conservative Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac. Some political analysts said today that the unions, sensing that the Government was vulnerable to pressure, were trying to continue the strike in an effort to produce the maximum possible embarrassment to Mr. Chirac. ''If the strike continues today, it's probably because there are other, more political ambitions for the action,'' said Pierre Mehaignerie, the Transportation Minister. ''There is certainly - and this seems clear - a desire on the part of some union organizations to call into question the very mission for which the Government was chosen by its electorate,'' he said. A 'Day Without Trains' Mr. Mehaignerie was speaking after the unions rejected a compromise over what had been the main demand of the strikers - that a proposed salary scale based on merit rather than seniority be withdrawn. A Government mediator, Francois Lavondes, said Thursday that the new plan would not be enacted, but union leaders termed the concession inadequate. The rail workers pointed out that Mr. Lavondes did not specifically say that the proposal would be withdrawn, and they said it might be reimposed if they returned to work. The unions called for a ''day without trains'' throughout France today as thousands were making plans to return home after winter vacations. In some places, the police were called out to clear bands of striking workers from tracks and switching centers that they had occupied in an effort to block trains. The state-owned railway system said that it expected only about one in six trains to operate on long routes and one in eight in the Paris suburbs today. 'A Crazy Machine' ''It's a crazy machine that we no longer control,'' Andre Bergeron, the head of Force Ouvriere, a moderate union that has questioned the continuation of the strike, told Le Monde. He was referring to the occupation of tracks and switching areas. Raising the possibility that the strike was ''taking a political turn,'' Mr. Bergeron said, ''Now, I fear everything.'' The confrontation between the huge railroad system and striking workers began as a wildcat walkout just over two weeks ago by train drivers opposed to the proposed stress on merit rather than seniority in promotions. But the strike's continuation, which was being urged in particular by the Communist-controlled C.G.T. and another union, the C.F.D.T., has clearly turned into a major political problem for the Government. Seen Aimed at Government Specifically, political analysts say the union action was aimed at weakening the Government, whose prestige had already suffered a sharp loss when student demonstrations a month ago forced it to scrap a major university reform plan. The train strike, in addition to taking a heavy economic toll, has posed a new set of political problems for Mr. Chirac, who governs in an often awkward power-sharing arrangment with President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist. Mr. Mitterrand met with a delegation of 150 striking workers and their families Thursday at a vacation spot, a gesture that was seen within Mr. Chirac's camp as something close to a provocation. Jacques Toubon, the head of Mr. Chirac's party, the Rally for the Republic, said Mr. Mitterrand's move was likely to ''reinforce the all-or-nothing attitude of the extremists and thus go against the social peace and cohesion that everybody is seeking.'' Rival Is Strengthened Meanwhile, the domination by hard-liners of the rail strike has apparently benefited Mr. Chirac's main rival among the conservatives, former Prime Minister Raymond Barre. Mr. Barre, who like Mr. Chirac is expected to run in presidential elections next year, has argued all along that the power-sharing arrangement with Mr. Mitterrand, which goes by the name cohabitation, was a mistake that would cripple Government action. The student movement and the train strike have given some credibility to Mr. Barre's position. On both occasions, Mr. Mitterrand has discreetly shown his sympathy for the Government's opponents, thereby making it more difficult for Mr. Chirac to resist compromises. Explaining their refusal to return to work following the Government's concession on the salary scale, striking workers cited the failure of management to propose an alternative scale. Workers are also demanding longer rest periods between trips and bigger year-end bonuses. Other Strikes Urged The C.G.T., which is particularly strong among the 230,000 employees of the rail system, called today for strikes in other state-owned French enterprises, raising the possibility that the movement could spread. The union called on subway, electricity and post office workers to walk out for 24 hours next week. ''Yes, the flood is rising, and it's just as well,'' Henri Krasucki, the C.G.T. leader, said Thursday. ''Some are afraid of it, but not the C.G.T. It's our only chance to make ourselves heard.''
