453|1987\01\03|PROGRAM TRADERS' IMPACT SEEN WANING|Amid all the factors that cause stocks to rise or fall, program trading of stock index futures now ranks as one of the most potent. But a number of developments are at work that will change the way that game is played and, to some extent, reduce the sharp impact it has had on stock prices.|Amid all the factors that cause stocks to rise or fall, program trading of stock index futures now ranks as one of the most potent. But a number of developments are at work that will change the way that game is played and, to some extent, reduce the sharp impact it has had on stock prices. Amid all the factors that cause stocks to rise or fall, program trading of stock index futures now ranks as one of the most potent. But a number of developments are at work that will change the way that game is played and, to some extent, reduce the sharp impact it has had on stock prices. The changes include the slimmer margins of profit available for program traders as more and more institutional investors hold futures contracts as much for protection as for profit. There are also signs that a number of leading brokerage houses may introduce a slew of stock index futures products aimed at individual investors. While individuals have always had the opportunity to trade the instruments, so far the markets have been dominated by institutions. New Expiration Times At the same time, because of worries about sharp price swings in stocks, particularly on ''triple witching hour'' Fridays, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the New York Futures Exchange plan to move up the expiration of their stock index futures contracts to the opening of trading on those Fridays from the close. Perhaps most important, the coming 12 months will give all investors more time to learn about the instruments and what they can do. ''This is a market that is still in its adolescence,'' said one futures trader, who asked not to be identified. ''Whenever you have new markets and new strategies, you might have some volatility in the short run, but longer term it will even out.'' Stock index futures - promises to buy or sell shares at a specified price by a given date of the stocks upon which an index is based - have existed only since 1982. Investors who buy an index future are wagering that the market will rise before the contract matures; investors can sell a futures contract if they believe the market is headed down. Wide Institutional Following The instruments have developed a wide following among institutions, which can gain a tremendous amount of exposure to the stock market or buy a big piece of protection for their portfolios at a very low cost. For example, an institutional investor who hedges a $10 million stock portfolio by selling futures contracts based on the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index would incur commissions of around $1,000. Selling the same amount of stock would cost about $10,000 in commissions. ''Stock index futures are an enormously valuable product for institutions,'' said Richard Ketchum, director of market regulation at the Securities and Exchange Commission. ''They provide new and more effective hedging techniques at a very low cost. They are good things, but that does not mean we are not concerned about the volatility that may accompany them.'' Increasingly, blame for sharp changes in stock prices has been directed at program traders, who attempt to lock in short-term profits by identifying price discrepancies between index futures and the underlying stocks. After the discrepancy is identified, these traders sell whichever is more expensive and buy the one that is cheaper. In Wall Street parlance, the technique is called index arbitrage. New Investors in Index Futures But in the last 12 months a new type of institutional investor has discovered the value of stock index futures. The participation of these institutions, whose strategies are primarily defensive, has narrowed the spread between the price of the futures and the underlying stocks, cutting into the potential profit of those who make index arbitrage trades. ''There are two types of ways that stock index futures can be used,'' said Andrew Harmstone-Rakowski, a vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management. ''One is as an investment strategy, like portfolio protection, and second as an arbitrage. There is no question that the former usage has gone up significantly in the past year and will continue to go up.'' Courtney D. Smith, a vice president and director of futures at the Twenty-First Securities Corporation, said that ''a year ago arbitragers frequently could pick up a guaranteed 13 to 16 percent rate of return on an index arbitrage.'' But, he added, ''Now it is very difficult to get much more than the prevailing rate on three-month Treasury bills.'' Until last year, it was generally believed that most of the effects on stock prices caused by the use of stock index futures were confined to the ''triple witching hour,'' one day every three months when stock index futures, stock index options and individual stock options all expire. On such days, stock prices tend to fluctuate wildly, as individuals and institutions who hold the contracts exercise their last chance to make a profit before the contracts expire. 85 Million Shares at the Bell ''Triple witching'' days still pack that potential. On Dec. 19, for examples, 85 million shares, or more than $3 billion worth of stock, changed hands on the closing bell. The Dow Jones industrial average, which had been up 6 points at 3:59 P.M., shot up another 10 points at the close. But the use of stock index futures has grown so rapidly - volume in 1986 was more than six times what it was just four years ago - that sharp moves can occur on ordinary trading days as well. That fact was driven home on Sept. 11 and Sept. 12, when the Dow fell by more than 120 points, its worst two-day plunge ever. The S.E.C. recently completed a study of what drove down prices so much in September. ''We didn't find that index futures were an underlying problem on those days,'' Mr. Ketchum said. ''They clearly had an impact, but nothing we now know suggests that the 11th and the 12th were the result of speculative binges.'' A number of studies, in fact, have shown that prices are not really any more volatile now than they were a decade or two ago. In a recent article, economists from the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company noted that ''even in 1986, stock-price volatility - when viewed, as it should be, in percentage terms rather than in terms of absolute changes - has not been out of line with other periods in the last decade and a half.'' Nevertheless, the sight of institutions, which the Morgan economists say now account for between 80 and 90 percent of all trading on the New York Stock Exchange, jumping in and out of the futures and stock markets may have a negative effect on individual investors, who see themselves as too small and too unsophisticated to participate in the action. But that perception may change in the coming year. A number of firms, including Kidder, Peabody & Company, are rumored to be on the brink of introducing new stock index futures funds for the public. ''What we have done is turn the marketplace away from the public and into an institutional playground,'' said Jack Barbanel, director of futures trading at Gruntal & Company. ''The key is to give the public something that makes them feel that they are in tune with the professionals.''
