455|1987\01\03|TV: GROWING CORPORATE TOOL|Companies, always eager to turn cost centers into profit centers, are trying to make greater use of their television operations.|Companies, always eager to turn cost centers into profit centers, are trying to make greater use of their television operations. Companies, always eager to turn cost centers into profit centers, are trying to make greater use of their television operations. Television first made its appearance in the business world to save commuting to meetings - staging corporate conferences was one frequent use. Now, however, companies are beginning to produce programming for sale to subsidiaries, to each other and even to the armed forces. Specialized programming is now available on such diverse topics as semiconductor technology, accounting and new surgical techniques. As more and more programs are developed, television is emerging as a more important tool in marketing, management and training. To help corporate viewers sift through the programs bombarding their satellite dishes, one company is even offering a guide. Penney's Has Its Own Network One of the more aggressive players in the new market for business television is the J. C. Penney Company, which originally installed its own satellite network so that its corporate buyers could more easily show new products to its 1,600 regional store managers. Now, however, Penney's is using the same equipment to produce programming for sale to other companies through a new subsidiary, seeking to capitalize on its own business experience and convenient midtown Manhattan location, ''We are business communicators ourselves,'' said Russell Longyear, the president of JCPenney Communications, who says the unit has been profitable for several months. ''We are able to offer personnel who understand how to deal with other companies' needs.'' The company has begun to diversify its offerings, Mr. Longyear said. ''We are interested in generating unique or original programming that would have a wide customer potential,'' he added. With that goal in mind, Penney's recently broadcast to its staff a production dealing with acquired immune deficiency syndrome. It was sold to others for $65 per viewer, as opposed to the flat rate charged by others. Live Programs Much of the new business programming is live rather than on tape. Live broadcasts are less costly and they permit phoned-in questions, which make the programs more dynamic, according to William C. Graves, director of communications for Computerland Inc., the largest computer retail chain. ''It becomes a call-in show, almost like a religious broadcast,'' he said. Part of the excitement of live shows, Mr. Graves added, is that ''anything can go wrong at any time.'' Computerland has done more than 30 live broadcasts - most of them aimed at franchise owners and sales representatives - and finds them an effective educational tool. But at one recent broadcast for customers, ''The Power User,'' only two callers responded from the 20 sites receiving the show. ''There's an aspect in which you can be seduced into playing around with expensive equipment,'' noted Mr. Graves, who said that a show generally cost $4,000 to $8,000 to produce. ''If it doesn't make sense, if people aren't watching, then we aren't going to do it.'' Calling on a Customer Other companies have had good results in using television to focus on specific customers. The Hewlett-Packard Company, which pioneered the use of video as a training tool in 1967, now uses its satellite network to make live customer visits. ''This is a new way of approaching a sales call,'' said Marika Ruumet, manager of HP-TV Network. ''You can go into the board room and simultaneously into the offices of the people who will really be affected by the purchase. Done live, it really puts people on the spot.'' But with 84,000 employees, Hewlett-Packard's major use for television remains training. While an initial $25,000 investment in television has grown to several million dollars and 34 full-time employees, HP-TV functions as a separate company and must bid competitively for jobs within Hewlett-Packard. The network has also found an outside market for its product, selling basic electronics films to customers including the United States Army. Managerial TV Stars Companies differ on whether to use professional actors or employees in business television. Hewlett-Packard does both. ''There is visibility and impact when you reach a number of people in your company at the same time,'' Miss Ruumet said. ''Middle managers and top executives are going to have to learn television skills.'' Marc Porat, president of Private Satellite Network Inc., puts it more strongly. ''Television is now coming to the world of business management in the way it came to politics in the 1960's,'' he said, adding that business people who do not relate to TV might face some career difficulties. Private Satellite Network is just one of several companies hoping to take advantage of the growing popularity of business television. The company provides equipment and programming for such blue-chip clients as Merrill Lynch, J.C. Penney and I.B.M., and also offers networks for lawyers and institutional investors. ''Only about 25 companies understand'' business television today, Mr. Porat said. ''But we are in the dawn of something that in 10 years will be trite.'' Growth Foreseen Another concern that sees an opportunity is the Telespan Publishing Company, whose president, Elliot Gold, said that by the end of the year there would be more than 36 ''networks,'' equipped with production and transmission facilities, broadcasting daytime business television to more than 7,000 viewing locations with satellite dishes. ''The earth stations are out there, and most teleconferencing sites are used less than one hour a day,'' Mr. Gold said. ''The people with programming know they can reach those sites.'' Telespan, in its own way, is seeking to capitalize on the wealth of programs becoming available. The company is just mailing its second issue of BusinessTV, a publication that it calls ''the TV Guide for corporate America.'' Mr. Gold himself solicits listings for the publication. Mr. Gold's company, based in Altadena, Calif., has covered the teleconferencing market for several years in another publication, a newsletter called Telespan. ''To me, business television is where we were in the early 1950's when people had no idea what programming was available, and we needed TV Guide.'' he said.
