456|1987\01\03|CONSTRUCTION SPENDING FELL 0.7% IN NOVEMBER|Construction spending slumped by seven-tenths of 1 percent in November, the second consecutive monthly decline, the Commerce Department reported today.|Construction spending slumped by seven-tenths of 1 percent in November, the second consecutive monthly decline, the Commerce Department reported today. Construction spending slumped by seven-tenths of 1 percent in November, the second consecutive monthly decline, the Commerce Department reported today. Spending on private and governmental building projects in November totaled $377 billion at an annual rate. That followed a decline of eight-tenths of 1 percent in October. The report made a sharp downward revision in the October estimate, which was originally depicted as a gain of 1.6 percent. Construction spending was unchanged in September and has not shown an increase since August. Analysts said the new figures more accurately reflected what was happening as the new tax law and overbuilding put a damper on construction activity. 'One of Weakest Sectors' ''Construction is going to be one of the weakest sectors of the economy,'' predicted Michael Evans, head of a Washington consulting concern. The tax law, which took effect on Thursday, removes many of the tax shelter advantages from real estate investment and reduces depreciation benefits. However, buildings completed and occupied before Jan. 1 could qualify for the more lucrative tax treatment of the old law. The report said residential construction fell by three-tenths of 1 percent in November, to an annual rate of $178 billion. A rise of six-tenths of 1 percent in multifamily dwellings offset a a two-tenths drop in construction of single-family homes. Multifamily Drops Seen Analysts said the decline in single-family construction was a reflection of lower sales of new homes in recent months. They said activity in this area should pick up with the recent further declines in mortgage rates. However, they predicted big decreases in multifamily construction. Nonresidential construction fell five-tenths of 1 percent in November, to an annual rate of $91.6 billion, following a 1.3 percent drop in October. Office construction fell 1.5 percent in November, while factory construction was off 1.6 percent and hotel and motel activity was unchanged. Only construction of shopping centers and other commercial buildings showed improvement among the major nonresidential categories, rising by three-tenths of 1 percent. Construction of public buildings fell 1.7 percent in November. Spending for highways, the biggest single category, was off 5.4 percent.
