457|1987\01\03|NEW ORDERS CLIMB 4.1% AS MILITARY GOODS JUMP|New orders to factories, spurred by an extraordinary demand for military equipment, climbed 4.1 percent in November, the biggest increase in two years, the Commerce Department said today.|New orders to factories, spurred by an extraordinary demand for military equipment, climbed 4.1 percent in November, the biggest increase in two years, the Commerce Department said today. New orders to factories, spurred by an extraordinary demand for military equipment, climbed 4.1 percent in November, the biggest increase in two years, the Commerce Department said today. The rush to beat the tax overhaul also contributed to the rise, analysts said. The department reported that total new orders rose by $7.9 billion in November to stand at $200.42 billion after falling 3.5 percent in October. Such a big increase would normally be seen as positive for the country's beleaguered manufacturing sector. But many analysts said the November gain was influenced by temporary factors, such as the new tax law, that offered little evidence that manufacturers will enjoy increased demand in 1987. In another report in which the tax law was a factor, the Commerce Department said construction spending fell by seven-tenths of 1 percent in November, the second consecutive monthly drop. Analysts said the figures reflected what was happening as the tax law and overbuilding dampened building activity.  [ Page 32. ]  November's increase in new orders was led by the largest one-month rise in military orders in 12 years, a 107.9 percent surge that reflected heavy demand for aircraft. The big increase, which followed a 43.4 percent decline in October, left military orders at $10.4 billion. ''Even though the overall number looks impressive, when you look more closely it completely evaporates,'' said Michael Evans, head of a Washington consulting concern. ''It isn't telling us anything about future strength.'' Without the military increase, orders would have gone up by a much smaller 1.13 percent in November, and some analysts said even this gain was overstating future economic strength. They attributed much of the advance in the civilian categories to a last-minute rush by businesses to buy and take delivery on capital equipment to qualify for higher tax benefits that expired on Jan. 1. Negative Growth Rate Seen Mr. Evans said he believed the economy limped along at a 1.5 percent annual growth rate in the just-completed October-December quarter and he said growth in the January-March period would slump to a negative 1 percent, as businesses and consumers cut back on spending with the advent of the new tax law. Nonmilitary capital spending climbed 6.4 percent as businesses placed rush orders to qualify for more lucrative tax treatment under the old law. Business capital spending to expand and modernize had fallen 4.6 percent in October. Two-thirds of the $7.9 billion increase in orders occurred in the durable goods sector, which rose by 5.5 percent in November. In an advance report 10 days ago, the Government had put the increase in durable goods, items expected to last three or more years, at a slightly higher 5.9 percent. Transportation Equipment Up Orders for transportation equipment rose 15.9 percent, powered by an 85.3 percent increase in the aircraft and missile category. Without the big increase in military orders, demand in the transportation category would have fallen 6.3 percent. Machinery orders were up 12.2 percent, led by a 16.2 percent rise in orders for office equipment. Orders for nondurable goods rose 2.5 percent, to $91.15 billion, after having fallen 1.9 percent in October. Shipments of manufactured goods rose 1 percent, to $198.2 billion, with two-thirds of the $2 billion rise attributed to a pickup in shipments of military goods.
