460|1987\01\03|Guidelines Ordered For Attorney Fines|Court administrators in New York are bracing for what one official says could be ''a real hot potato'' - formal rules stating the fines judges may impose on lawyers for bad courtroom behavior.|Court administrators in New York are bracing for what one official says could be ''a real hot potato'' - formal rules stating the fines judges may impose on lawyers for bad courtroom behavior. Court administrators in New York are bracing for what one official says could be ''a real hot potato'' - formal rules stating the fines judges may impose on lawyers for bad courtroom behavior. Judges are already allowed to penalize lawyers for behavior ranging from showing up late for a hearing to filing frivolous legal motions that slow cases. But in practice, court adminsitrators say, judges have seldom chosen to impose fines. Last month, however, a case in which a judge had imposed such a penalty came before the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals. In its ruling, the court said there should be guidelines stating what level of fine is merited by which behavior. The ruling instructed the State Office of Court Administration to draft guidelines as quickly as possible. ''It's going to change the rules of the game a lot,'' said Matthew T. Crosson, the deputy chief administrator of the courts. ''It will give judges much more power to control their caseloads.'' Administration officials said it was difficult to say how stiff the penalties might be. One state law already on the books, however -which only covers personal injury suits - allows fines of up to $10,000. ''If we're going to have a meaningful sanction, it will have to be more than a token amount,'' said the counsel to the state Office of Court Administration, Michael Colodner. A spokesman for the City Bar Association, however, warned that forming the guidelines, a job that administrators will start this month and hope to complete next month, will not be easy. ''It's going to take some time and a great deal of thought,'' said the chairman of the Association's Committee on Professional Discipline, Stanley S. Arkin. ''There are lawyers who abuse the process,'' he said, but ''you don't want to inhibit novel and creative lawsuits.'' Stacking Courthouses A joint city-state committee studying the problems of New York City's crowded court buildings is considering a uniquely New York solution for at least one site: building on top of an existing courthouse. Committee members say engineering studies are under way on a proposal to add as many as four stories to an eight-story, 57-year-old building at 80 Centre Street in lower Manhattan, which is currently used for courts and state offices. Members of the committee say the proposal, part of a $200 million capital improvements project pledged by Mayor Koch last August, illustrates the difficulty they face in trying to expand and improve courts in the congested areas where most of the city's court buildings are situated. ''Finding new land in Manhattan is going to be difficult, if not impossible,'' said a member of the committee, Harvey W. Spectre, a deputy budget director at the city's Office of Management and Budget. Mr. Spectre said construction on the 80 Centre Street site could begin next year if the project is found to be feasible. Jurors' Identities More and more court clerks and judges are refusing requests from reporters and the public for the names of jurors in highly publicized trials, administrators say. The reason: a recent appeals court ruling that said they are not required to provide the names. The ruling, by an Appellate Division panel in Brooklyn, resulted from one of the first legal challenges to a 1978 state law that called such information ''confidential'' and only subject to release by order of the Appellate Division. Administrators said the ruling has been circulated to clerks in courtrooms across the state. Whether such rules are needed and will be universally applied in courts throughout the state are still subjects of debate. ''In my experience, there's very little harassment of jurors,'' Justice Peter J. McQuillan, administrative judge of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, said. New Post, Cold Shoulder New York State's first Director of the Office of Security Services is expected to be named sometime next week, but court administrators say he will likely get a cold welcome from many members of the current court security force. The reason, administrators and court security officials say, is the long-simmering opposition among many unionized court workers to the idea of a court security office in general and to this particular administrative version. A key conflict, they say, is that court clerks, who have traditionally supervised in-court security, are not to be considered for promotion to the supervisory jobs that are to be created under the direction of the state security chief. Instead, the supervisor's jobs - there are to be at least six deputies or assistant directors -are reserved for uniformed court officers. ''We wanted to give them a career ladder,'' said Mr. Crosson at the Office of Court Administration, referring to the uniformed officers. ''But it's been a real mess.'' ''This is just the first shot,'' said Robert W. Olivari Jr., spokesman for the New York State Court Clerks Association, referring to the director's appointment. ''Are we going to continue to oppose it?'' he said. ''Definitely yes.''  COLUMN ONE: THE COURTS
