462|1987\01\03|Treasury Issues Up Modestly|Spurred by a sharp drop in short-term interest rates and some weaker than expected economic statistics, prices of Treasury notes and bond rose modestly yesterday. In doing so, they recouped some of their declines of earlier in the week.|Spurred by a sharp drop in short-term interest rates and some weaker than expected economic statistics, prices of Treasury notes and bond rose modestly yesterday. In doing so, they recouped some of their declines of earlier in the week. Spurred by a sharp drop in short-term interest rates and some weaker than expected economic statistics, prices of Treasury notes and bond rose modestly yesterday. In doing so, they recouped some of their declines of earlier in the week. Financial analysts expected that the upward pressure on rates would quickly subside once the credit markets got past the many disruptions at year-end. Besides the unusual flows of funds caused by the efforts of banks and other institutions to present a more favorable balance sheet on Dec. 31, bankers said, there was extra upward pressure on rates from the rush to complete many asset sales and other transactions before the new tax bill took effect on New Year's Day. Yesterday, however, the upward pressures on rates subsided quickly. Short-Term Rates Tumble The overnight rate for bank loans in the Federal funds market fell to about 6 3/8 percent, from 16.17 percent on Tuesday and 14.35 percent on Wednesday. Other short-term rates also declined, with 30-day commercial paper falling from about 7.70 percent on Wednesday, to 6.15 percent, and three-month Treasury bills falling about an eighth of a percentage point, to 5.56 percent. The decline in short-term interest rates - which reduced the overnight cost of financing government securities from as high as 18 percent on Wednesday to 6 1/8 percent yesterday - was widely expected, but was still a relief for securities dealers that hold large inventories of recently auctioned Treasury notes due in two, four and seven years. The cost of financing inventories of other securities also declined, as leading banks reduced their broker loan rates to 7 1/4 percent or 7 1/2 percent, from 17 percent or 18 percent on Wednesday. By 2 P.M., when trading in the Treasury market stopped, the 7 1/2 percent bonds due in 2016 were up nearly 1 point and were offered at 101 1/8 to yield 7.40 percent, while the recently auctioned 7 percent notes due in 1994 were offered at 100 3/32, up 17/32, to yield 6.98 percent, up from about 99 1/2 at Tuesday's auction. Securities dealers said that besides the drop in short-term interest rates, prices were helped yesterday by the Commerce Department's report of a decline of seven-tenths of 1 percent in construction spending in November and a revision of October's data to show a decline of eight-tenths of 1 percent instead of the 1.6 percent increase previously reported. Growth Forecast Reduced Analysts at Money Market Services, a Belmont, Calif., economic analysis firm, said that ''large downward revisions in today's construction spending data and weakness in the merchandise trade report'' had led them to reduce their forecast for fourth-quarter economic growth after inflation to 1.4 percent from 2.5 percent. Last Wednesday, the Commerce Department's report of a record trade deficit for November of more than $19 billion was a disappointment to some analysts who had expected a smaller deficit. ''Anything suggesting the economy is growing at less than 2 percent, or not at all, will heighten expectations that the Fed will ease some time in the first quarter,'' one Treasury note trader said. Yesterday's trading was not active enough to provide a clear sign of the market's expectations, he said, adding that many participants are looking ahead to the December employment data scheduled for publication next Friday. CREDIT MARKETS
