463|1987\01\03|JOB SEEKERS AWAIT JAPANESE AUTO PLANT IN INDIANA|Things have not been the same in this western Indiana town since two Japanese manufacturers said they would build an automobile plant on some cornfields near the Wabash River.|Things have not been the same in this western Indiana town since two Japanese manufacturers said they would build an automobile plant on some cornfields near the Wabash River. Things have not been the same in this western Indiana town since two Japanese manufacturers said they would build an automobile plant on some cornfields near the Wabash River. The plant is now only lines on paper, but developers are already making inquiries with the municipality about building shopping malls and pizza stands. People are coming from as far away as Florida for jobs that will not start until 1989. Town officials, used to dealing with Indiana storekeepers, are memorizing Japanese salutations. On Dec. 2, Fuji Heavy Industries and Isuzu Motors announced they would build a $500 million assembly plant that would employ 1,700 people and would be making a quarter of a million vehicles a year by the mid-1990's. But talk of plans for such a plant spread long before the announcement was made, and people started calling the local employment office about jobs in September, officials said. Attention From All Over Like other small towns where Japanese companies have announced plans to build factories, Lafayette drew instant attention. It is now grappling with requests and offers of all kinds, from contractors wanting a hand in the construction to newly arrived job seekers looking for a place to live. In Bloomington, Ill., where a joint Mitsubishi and Chrysler plant is to open in late 1988, jobless families have trickled in from Texas and Florida in the mistaken belief that the plant is already hiring. One Bloomington shelter for the homeless has been full of such migrant families since late summer, said Tina Sipula, the shelter's director. In Georgetown, Ky., the job inquiries started the day Toyota announced it would be opening a plant there. Now, a year later, 50,000 resumes are on file for 1,400 jobs at a plant that will not open until 1988. ''Someone even applied from the Republic of China,'' said Helen Flowers, a manager at the local employment office. ''And we got at least one from Hawaii.'' Rick Eli, a construction worker from Florida, heard rumors about the Lafayette plant and drove up here in the fall. So far he has been taking temporary construction jobs, hoping to find enough work to carry him until the plant gets to the point where sandblasters are needed. Biggest Thing Since Purdue ''I'll have plenty to do till they're ready for people like me,'' Mr. Eli said. '' I'll be doing everything from carpentry to plumbing.'' Sandblasters will not be hired for a year or so, but Mr. Eli checks the site anyway to see how things are coming along. Some people consider the plant the biggest thing to happen to Lafayette since Purdue University opened here in 1865. Lafayette is in the center of Tippecanoe County, where Gen. William Henry Harrison defeated the Indians in 1811 and got the slogan for his 1840 Presidential campaign, ''Tippecanoe and Tyler, too,'' a reference to the battle and his running-mate, John Tyler. Although a local radio program received a few snide calls about Pearl Harbor right after the announcement that the Japanese plant would be built, most Lafayette officials are embracing all things Japanese. A group of them are planning a trip to the Japanese Embassy in Washington and to New York City to try sushi at a sushi bar. ''I've never had it before,'' said Mark Davis, president of Greater Lafayette Progress, Inc., an economic development group, ''but I'm going to learn to like it.'' Gordon Kingma, executive vice president of the Lafayette Chamber of Commerce, has been carrying a pocket Japanese dictionary around with him for months. ''The only thing I know so far is good morning,'' Mr. Kingma said. ''That will get me to the afternoon.'' His office has been fielding calls from all over the country, from a woman in Dallas representing an executive search concern, from a Houston developer who wanted to build a shopping center, ''and a fellow from North Dakota called and asked if there would be room to build a Taco John,'' Mr. Kingma said. ''We're trying to keep a file of all these people.'' Green Tea and Annual Reports All this is a result of years in which high state officials courted the Japanese and sat through ceremonial meetings that, the officials said, took a little getting used to. ''You drink green tea, exchange gifts, they tell you what a fine state you have, and you say what a fine company they have, because you've read the annual report,'' said Lieut. Gov. John Mutz of Indiana, who was the state's chief negotiator in the deal. ''It takes years to get the thing done.'' Indiana was repeatedly passed over as the Japanese opened automobile plants in neighoring states, but once the Lafayette deal was official, Gov. Robert D. Orr gave the Japanese representatives an enthusiastic welcome. ''Your state government - since you are now corporate citizens of Indiana - will support you as you grow and prosper,'' he said.'' Not everyone is as optimistic. ''There are still going to be poor people sleeping under the bridge,'' said Mary Bays, an unemployed laundress who has been staying at a homeless shelter.
