464|1987\01\03|FRANKLIN PAPERS, VOLUME 25, TELL OF 5 FATEFUL MONTHS AT FRENCH COURT|Only five months are covered in the newly issued 25th volume of ''The Papers of Benjamin Franklin'' - 25 more thick volumes are still to come, which should take Yale University Press well into the next century - but the papers it contains are among the most telling in his diplomatic life and in the trembling fortunes of the American|Only five months are covered in the newly issued 25th volume of ''The Papers of Benjamin Franklin'' - 25 more thick volumes are still to come, which should take Yale University Press well into the next century - but the papers it contains are among the most telling in his diplomatic life and in the trembling fortunes of the American Only five months are covered in the newly issued 25th volume of ''The Papers of Benjamin Franklin'' - 25 more thick volumes are still to come, which should take Yale University Press well into the next century - but the papers it contains are among the most telling in his diplomatic life and in the trembling fortunes of the American Revolution. ''About 35 percent of the material in the book has never been published before,'' said Barbara Oberg, editor in chief of the Franklin Papers. ''Primarily, the new material includes letters written to him. Many of Franklin's own letters were destroyed by the British when they were in Philadelphia at the same time that he was in France.'' The letters and documents pull together all the known material, to and from Franklin, in English and French, that has been found in archives here and abroad about his activities in France from Oct. 1, 1777, through Feb. 28, 1778. During this period, when the 71-year-old Franklin effectively headed the three-man American mission to Paris, he achieved the most important success of his career for the new united (still a small ''u'' in some of these documents) States: French-American treaties of amity, commerce and general alliance. Historians have pointed out that these treaties were turning points - in the war on and off the battlefields as well as on the high seas - that led to eventual success in the rebellion by the American colonies against Britain. ''Franklin was enough of a diplomat to realize that the treaties could be attained because they also fit into France's own plans and position in European affairs,'' Mrs. Oberg said. She succeeded William B. Willcox, who was editor of the Franklin Papers for 15 years until his death in 1985. A Renaissance Man The personal and official papers reveal Franklin to be a Renaissance man: writer, philosopher, scientist and above all - especially at this perilous moment in the fight for independence by civilians under arms against professional British soldiers and German mercenaries - a brilliant statesman. As if these talents were not enough, he was simultaneously ''Mon Cher Papa'' to the ladies of Paris. That is the title of a separate Yale University Press volume written by Claude-Anne Lopez, one of the longtime editors of the Franklin Papers. Mrs. Lopez cited a passage from one of the letters written to him by Anne-Louise Brillon de Jouy, ''Do you know, my dear papa, that people have criticized the sweet habit I have taken of sitting on your lap, and your habit of soliciting from me what I always refuse?'' She wrote 103 letters to him; he wrote 29 letters to her (they wrote to each other only in French). ''The verb aimer flew back and forth between them more than a thousand times in all its modes and tenses,'' Mrs. Lopez said.  It is significant that Franklin was also friendly with her husband, Brillon de Jouy, a Government official who was a go-between for French merchants selling weapons to the hard-pressed American colonies. In one letter Franklin alluded to a game of chess played in Mrs. Brillon's bathroom while she soaked in the tub. ''Of course, bathtubs in those days were covered with a wooden plank,'' Mrs. Lopez observed. ''To murder Marat in his tub, Charlotte Corday had to lose her life, not her modesty.'' The Agreeable Ladies Of his many social relationships -in between raising money and arms for his countrymen - Franklin himself told his stepniece: ''Somebody gave it out that I lov'd Ladies; and then every body presented me their Ladies (or the Ladies presented themselves) to be embrac'd, that is to have their Necks kissed. For as to kissing of Lips or Cheeks it is not the Mode here, the first is reckon'd rude, and the other may rub off the Paint. The French Ladies have however 1,000 other ways of rendering themselves agreeable.'' The Franklin Paper editors point out that Volume 25 opens in despondency and closes in elation. Through October and November of 1777, the American mission was not making any real progress in drawing the French deeper into the Revolution. British columns were drawing closer to Albany and Philadelphia. One plan of financing the American war with the sale of tobacco had evaporated. The French remained noncommittal about an independent treaty with the Americans. Franklin and his fellow commissioners needed money to pay for arms and provisions. ''The total Failure of Remittances has embarass'd us exceedingly,'' they wrote home to the Committee for Foreign Affairs. ''The Contracts we enter'd into for Clothing and Arms in Expectation of those Remittances and which are now beginning to call for Payment distress us much, and we are in imminent Danger of Bankruptcy.'' At the same time, Franklin's health caused him some distress. Describing his ailments at ''near 72 Years,'' he wrote to a physician, ''Subject to slight Fits of the Gout at long Intervals; was accustomed to what is called good Living, used but little Exercise, being from the Nature of his Employment, as well as from Love of Books, much in his Chamber writing or reading.'' The Turn of the Tide On Dec. 4, 1777, a year and a day after Franklin's arrival in France, news reached Paris of Gen. John Burgoyne's surrender at Saratoga. That turned the tide. The documents disclose that the French Foreign Minister, Charles Gravier Vergennes, then received permission to open negotiations for the treaties with the Americans. ''A chain of hope now ran from the French ministers to the commissioners and then to Congress and the American people,'' the editors note. ''Franklin's position changed, and his way of life within it. He was seen more in public and started to show his human side. He attended a meeting of the Royal Academy of Sciences for the first time in 12 months. He delivered gifts of his newly translated work, 'Way to Wealth.' He gave a party to celebrate the 13 states. When he appeared at the opera or the theater, crowds acclaimed him. At a ball, the ladies swarmed around to embrace him despite the glasses on his nose.'' In one document, Franklin sent words to summer soldiers and doubters of the American Revolution: ''We must remember that the Revolution was not directed by the leaders of faction, but by the opinion and voice of the majority of the people; that the grounds and principles upon which it were formed were known, weighed and approved by every individual of that majority.'' A few years later, Franklin, having done so much to help win the war, envisioned the next stage for the United States. To Josiah Quincy, on Sept. 11, 1783, he wrote an often-quoted line, ''There never was a good war or a bad peace.''
