465|1987\01\03|Murdoch Set Back In Australian Deal|The publisher Rupert Murdoch was dealt a setback today in his effort to acquire the Australian newspaper and broadcasting company Herald and Weekly Times Ltd. for $1.2 billion (United States).|The publisher Rupert Murdoch was dealt a setback today in his effort to acquire the Australian newspaper and broadcasting company Herald and Weekly Times Ltd. for $1.2 billion (United States). The publisher Rupert Murdoch was dealt a setback today in his effort to acquire the Australian newspaper and broadcasting company Herald and Weekly Times Ltd. for $1.2 billion (United States). Mr. Murdoch had once seemed sure of success, but Herald directors recommended today that shareholders accept a $1.38 billion offer from Robert Holmes a Court, a powerful Australian businessman. The Herald is a Melbourne-based empire built up by Mr. Murdoch's father, the late Sir Keith Murdoch. It has daily newspapers in every Australian state capital. Four weeks ago, the Herald board agreed to endorse the Murdoch bid, but on Dec. 24, Mr. Holmes a Court made an offer of cash or securities in a little-known company, J. N. Taylor Holdings Ltd. Mr. Murdoch and many analysts argued that the Murdoch offer, in securities, offered a better value to shareholders. On Thursday, Mr. Holmes a Court increased his cash offer, to $13.50 (Australian) from $13, and augmented his securities offer. (The Australian dollar is currently worth about 66 cents in United States currency.) Mr. Holmes a Court also lowered his condition for a minimum share purchase, to 56 percent from 90 percent. Mr. Murdoch, who arrived in Australia this week from the United States, visited Herald directors Thursday. He said he would not increase his offer but would take it directly to shareholders. ''We will regroup and consider,'' he said, adding that he might pursue legal action against the Herald board. There has been considerable speculation that if Mr. Holmes a Court succeeds in his bid, he would sell parts of the Herald Group to Mr. Murdoch's Australian rival, John Fairfax Ltd. Mr. Murdoch began his publishing empire in Australia and the takeover would make him by far the biggest newspaper proprietor in Australia, with control of 75 percent of the country's major daily newspapers. In the United States, Mr. Murdoch owns sizable broadcasting and publishing holdings, including The New York Post and The Boston Herald. COMPANY NEWS
