466|1987\01\03|PLAYERS|Freeman McNeil has already played the game in his head. He has dashed over the Cleveland Stadium turf, he has fought the wind from the open end facing Lake Erie, and he has slithered past tacklers. And he likes what he has done. So today's American Football Conference divisional playoff between the Jets and the Cleveland Browns will bring the singular McNeil over familiar territory.|Freeman McNeil has already played the game in his head. He has dashed over the Cleveland Stadium turf, he has fought the wind from the open end facing Lake Erie, and he has slithered past tacklers. And he likes what he has done. So today's American Football Conference divisional playoff between the Jets and the Cleveland Browns will bring the singular McNeil over familiar territory. Freeman McNeil has already played the game in his head. He has dashed over the Cleveland Stadium turf, he has fought the wind from the open end facing Lake Erie, and he has slithered past tacklers. And he likes what he has done. So today's American Football Conference divisional playoff between the Jets and the Cleveland Browns will bring the singular McNeil over familiar territory. ''I try to simulate in my mind what's going to take place in certain situations,'' he explained. ''In addition to the team game plan, I also make up a game plan of my own in my head. So I have two game plans.'' And is his own game plan accurate? ''Usually, I'm about 89 percent right,'' he said. It is best not to question McNeil about that figure - or any other figures he comes up with. For McNeil seems to be the only player who understands the peculiar ways in which he analyzes life, or football, or a combination of both. Take this game. Pat Ryan will be the Jets' quarterback for the second straight playoff game, but he said the team will go only as far as McNeil carried it. McNeil, said Coach Joe Walton, was the ''pulse'' of the offense. And McNeil talked continually about team effort and the job of his line. The truth is, the Jets need another big game out of McNeil, who has produced three straight 100-yard performances. Ryan is at his best when McNeil is running and the quarterback can then execute the no-mistake, short-range offense that leads to first downs, clock-killing, a potential Jets victory. It has taken virtually a whole season for McNeil to hit his stride of other years. Significantly, McNeil has done it in December. Once, that had been his cruelest month. Coming into the season, he achieved a 100-yard rushing performance only once in a game in December. This season he had been able to generate a 100-yard game only once, against the Indianapolis Colts, in the first 10 he played. In those 10 appearances, he averaged only 61 yards a game, 3.3 yards a carry. It had been a season in which, in the second game, he suffered a horrifying accident in which his right elbow popped out of its socket when he landed on it - and then popped back in. He missed four games, but it has been only lately that he is running like the old McNeil. The injury took most of the season to heal, even though he returned a few weeks sooner than doctors had predicted. That accident, he now admits, had depressed him, making him consider ending his career. But in a sense, it also rejuvenated him. ''At the time I got hurt, I was starting to get into a groove, and doing the things I was doing the previous years,'' he said. ''I felt I benefited from it so much because I had a chance to analyze it being apart from the team - dejected, alone, and said, 'geez, what am I doing this for?' But then I set a goal for myself. I wanted to play before the season was out - and play effectively.'' It has always been an irritant to McNeil that he has never played an entire 16-game season. The one season he did complete he led the league in rushing: the nine-game strike season of 1982. That was followed by two spectacular playoff games - 202 yards against the Cincinnati Bengals and 101 against the Los Angeles Raiders. Still, he was generally ineffective in December. McNeil, the player who had been able to generate 19 games of 100 or more yards, could do it only once in 13 December games. Usually, he went into December as a battered player, having invariably been seriously injured at some point in the season - sprained foot his first season of 1981, separated shoulder in 1983, rib injuries in 1984, rib and ankle problems in 1985, and this season's dislocated elbow. Was he thinking this time about December? Especially after this season's injury? ''No. Everything I did in the past didn't make any difference any more,'' he insisted. ''I shed all that, and I thought about how important it was for me to be in the N.F.L. and I could have been out of it. I was getting slapped in the face with reality, and I learned I can change things. It did a lot for me. It let me know that nothing's guaranteed.'' In his last three games, though, he is averaging 126 yards a game and 5.3 yards a carry. He is, again, a hot runner. ''Playing against a guy like that, you're sitting on a keg of dynamite and you hope it doesn't go off while he's in your ball park,'' said the Browns' coach, Marty Schottenheimer. Schottenheimer was grading players in 1981 in Cleveland, and Lawrence Taylor, McNeil, Kenny Easley and Ronnie Lott were available that year in the college draft. ''I studied Freeman McNeil very closely,'' Schottenheimer recalled. ''I had Freeman rated as good as those players.'' When told how Schottenheimer had rated him, McNeil replied, ''Well, I can't let him down.''
