468|1987\01\03|TUGS OF SUN AND MOON CAUSE TIDAL COMMOTION|The phenomenon that has caused extremely high tides this week involves six factors effecting the relative positions of the Sun, the Moon and the Earth, according to Government specialists.|The phenomenon that has caused extremely high tides this week involves six factors effecting the relative positions of the Sun, the Moon and the Earth, according to Government specialists. The phenomenon that has caused extremely high tides this week involves six factors effecting the relative positions of the Sun, the Moon and the Earth, according to Government specialists. If all were in complete coincidence, combined with the storms that have battered both coasts, it could have proved disastrous, the specialists said yesterday. ''That would be a real doozy,'' said Dr. LeRoy E. Doggett of the Nautical Almanac Office of the United States Naval Observatory in Washington. The period of extreme high tides began on Dec. 30 and should begin tapering off today. The Factors at Work According to Stephen K. Gill of the National Ocean Service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the six factors in play are these: * The Moon passed almost directly between the Sun and Earth on Dec. 30. In that alignment, syzygy, the gravitational tugs of Sun and Moon work together to cause a ''spring tide.'' * On that same day the Moon was closest to the Earth in its elliptical monthly orbit around the planet, adding to the moon's gravitational effect. * The Earth is nearing its shortest distance from the Sun in the planet's annual journey around that star, augmenting the Sun's gravitational effect. The Earth reaches that point, perihelion, on Jan. 4. * On Dec. 30 the Moon reached the southernmost point in its orbit, relative to the Earth's Equator. Therefore the tidal bulge caused by the tug of the Moon in the Earth's water envelope reached its highest latitude in regions below the Moon and on the opposite side of the Earth. * Likewise, shortly before midnight, Eastern standard time, on Dec. 21 the Sun reached its southernmost point, the winter solstice, causing a similar tidal effect. In both cases the effect is assymetrical. Were it not for other factors this would cause only a single very high tide, rather than two. * Another factor is the current state of an 18.6-year cycle in wobbling of the lunar orbit. In the manner in which the once-popular hula hoops rotated about the hips in a wobbling pattern, the two points at which the lunar orbit crosses the plane of the Earth's Equator rotate in space. The current effect of this process, which astronomers call the regression of the lunar nodes, is to place the Moon exceptionally far south. Lunar and Solar Effects The influence of solar gravity is about half that of the Moon. It is spread over a longer period since the Earth takes a year to circle the Sun. The period of closer proximity to the Sun, centered on Jan. 4, is therefore extended. Lunar effects occur in a monthly cycle and are more transient. High tides occur simultaneously and symmetrically on opposite sides of the Earth, twice daily at each location. They are high on the side opposite the Moon in part because that side of the Earth is farthest from the Moon and the effect of lunar gravity there is minimal. Lunar gravity also displaces the solid Earth toward the Moon more than it displaces oceans on the far side.
