469|1987\01\03|WOMAN HOPES BABY WILL SWAY SOVIET TO FREE HER HUSBAND|An American woman who has spent seven years trying to get her husband out of the Soviet Union says she is optimistic that the birth of the couple's first child on New Year's Day may help her cause.|An American woman who has spent seven years trying to get her husband out of the Soviet Union says she is optimistic that the birth of the couple's first child on New Year's Day may help her cause. An American woman who has spent seven years trying to get her husband out of the Soviet Union says she is optimistic that the birth of the couple's first child on New Year's Day may help her cause. The woman, Susan Graham, 31 years old, met her husband, Matvey Finkel, on a study trip to the Soviet Union. She married him seven years ago and has lived in Moscow on and off since then. She said that she had returned to Spokane so there would be no question about the child's citizenship and that she had not decided whether to return with her baby to the Soviet Union. ''The child is innocent in all of this,'' she said Thursday after the birth of her daughter, Emily Ann Finkel. ''She has absolutely nothing to do with any of it,'' she continued. ''The impact of it all may soften hearts a bit.'' Ms. Graham talked to her husband by telephone about a half hour after Emily's birth, and she said he was elated. Husband Felt 'A Bit Left Out' ''He was with friends and had champagne at the ready,'' she said, adding that he said he felt ''a bit left out.'' ''He is really pleased and thrilled'' she said. ''But it's hard to explain over the phone what she looks like. He was concerned because I had a long labor, and he kept calling for progress reports.'' Soviet officials have given vague reasons for denying an exit visa to Mr. Finkel, who is 38 years old. Ms. Graham said they had cited concern about information her husband might have obtained while serving his compulsory one-year term in the Soviet Army 15 years ago. She gathered signatures in downtown Spokane three weeks ago as part of a petition to draw attention to her case. The petition was sent to President Reagan, along with a request for him to intercede with the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Ms. Graham's parents met with Mr. Reagan while he was in Spokane for a political rally Oct. 31, and the President assured them he would take a personal interest in helping Mr. Finkel. ''There is no future there for my husband or for us as a family,'' she said. ''It's so unpleasant there, and we'd be better off here - and together, obviously.'' Ms. Graham added, ''For Emily to appear in 1987 is a good sign that this will be the year we'll all be together.''
