475|1987\01\03|DEAF MAN JAILED WITHOUT COUNSEL|A man who cannot hear or speak spent 41 days in jail on an open-ended sentence he received in a case in which he was not represented by a lawyer, a public defender says.|A man who cannot hear or speak spent 41 days in jail on an open-ended sentence he received in a case in which he was not represented by a lawyer, a public defender says. A man who cannot hear or speak spent 41 days in jail on an open-ended sentence he received in a case in which he was not represented by a lawyer, a public defender says. Judge Murray Meyerson had given the man, Monroe Halcomb, 31 years old, an indefinite sentence for a probation violation. Mr. Halcomb was discovered in jail by Kenneth Marvin, an assistant public defender, and was released two days before Christmas. Mr. Marvin said he learned of Mr. Halcomb's case ''purely by accident'' from another prisoner. ''He could have been in there forever,'' Mr. Marvin said. ''There are safeguards and procedures built into the system to prevent this kind of thing from happening,'' he said. ''In this case, they were totally ignored.'' Mother Feared Her Son Judge Meyerson said he ordered Mr. Halcomb jailed because the defendant's mother, Ethel Halcomb, said she and her family feared the 290-pound man when he was drunk. She also said alcoholism counselors had recommended confinement. Mr. Halcomb was never represented by a lawyer. In addition, he was not provided with a sign language interpreter when he pleaded not guilty to a charge of disorderly intoxication July 7. ''Everybody should be represented by an attorney,'' Judge Meyerson said. ''In this particular case, his mother, who he lived with, was with him.'' The case began May 10 when the manager of a doughnut shop complained of an unruly customer. Mr. Halcomb was charged with disorderly intoxication, a charge that carries a maximum penalty of 60 days in jail. Judge Meyerson ordered him to participate in an alcohol and drug abuse program, but his mother said he quit after a couple of sessions. On Sept. 5, Edward Cooke, supervisor of Dade County's alcohol and drug abuse program, asked Judge Meyerson to sentence Mr. Halcomb to treatment. The judge sent Mr. Halcomb to jail Nov. 13, saying that the indefinite sentence was treatment rather than punishment. When an administrative judge signed the release, he ordered Mr. Halcomb to appear before Judge Meyerson next week. A lawyer will accompany him.
