476|1987\01\03|SIHANOUK'S SON JOINS FATHER'S FIGHT|Eight years ago this month, when the Vietnamese Army marched into Phnom Penh and overthrew Pol Pot, Prince Norodom Ranariddh was living the untroubled life of a university lecturer in France. Correction: January 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition|Eight years ago this month, when the Vietnamese Army marched into Phnom Penh and overthrew Pol Pot, Prince Norodom Ranariddh was living the untroubled life of a university lecturer in France. Eight years ago this month, when the Vietnamese Army marched into Phnom Penh and overthrew Pol Pot, Prince Norodom Ranariddh was living the untroubled life of a university lecturer in France. He thought the turbulent years of his Cambodian youth were behind him. His father, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, had been in and out of power - first as King, later as leader of a Government overthrown by Washington-backed officers, and finally as Pol Pot's head of a Khmer Rouge state, brought back to give the regime respectability. ''I was not so rich in France,'' he said of life in exile. ''But I was very free.'' As the anniversary Jan. 7 of Vietnamese occupation nears, Prince Ranariddh, 43 years old, is back in Southeast Asia, deeply enmeshed in the torment of what he calls ''my poor country.'' He is commander of a growing army of guerrillas, one of three forces allied against the regime in Phnom Penh, as well as the alliance's diplomatic strategist. He is also becoming in some Cambodian eyes an heir to the powerful symbolic role of his father. Prince Ranariddh, in an interview on New Year's Eve in his Bangkok home, said he did not seek a royal role. But in the minds of exiles, he said, Prince Sihanouk is certainly identified with a period of ''real independence for our country, and also peace, liberty and development - a very beautiful time.'' A Learning Experience Prince Ranariddh said that in the last three years of shuttling back and forth between the Cambodian border and Beijing, where his father is based, he had come to know the Cambodian people for the first time. ''I was the son of a King,'' he said. ''I lived in the palace, and I spent a lot of time - maybe more than 10 years - abroad, especially in France. And so I did not know the Khmer people, the Khmer mentality, the Khmer feeling.'' ''Thanks to my father, I have had the great joy to discover my people,'' said the Prince, a scholar of international law with a Ph.D. from the University of Aix-en-Provence, where he later taught. The Prince said he is worried that the Soviet Union, which supports Vietnam, and China, which backs the Cambodian insurgents, might strike a deal on Cambodia, to the country's detriment. ''I cannot believe that China and the Soviet Union, the two Communist superpowers, could allow Cambodia to adopt a liberal ideology,'' he said. ''In Washington at the State Department recently they told me: 'Don't worry about that, because the hostility between the Soviet Union and China is so deep that there is no chance they will reach an agreement on Cambodia,' '' he said. ''The Americans are really very naive.'' The Popularity Contest The Prince said a Chinese journalist recently asked him for proof that his father was still popular in his homeland. ''I said the proof is that the Chinese Government had printed a hundred thousand portraits of Prince Sihanouk and sent them to the Khmer Rouge to take inside Cambodia,'' he said. ''Could they bring to our people the portrait of Mr. Pol Pot?'' he asked. ''Could they play on the radio the voice of Mr. Khieu Samphan?'' Khieu Samphan represents the Khmer Rouge in the coalition, which also includes the Sihanoukists and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front. Pol Pot, who led the Khmer Rouge Government that left hundreds of thousands dead from 1975 to 1978, is said to have retired; there are reports that he is gravely ill. The Prince said he doubted that anything in the Khmer Rouge's radical ideology had changed, despite highly publicized commitments to more centrist policies. Rivalry Within Alliance The Khmer Rouge remains the strongest member of the coalition. Prince Ranariddh said it was imperative that his army equalize resources with the more powerful and numerous Khmer Rouge, so that Cambodians who do not want the Vietnamese will cease to fear a return of the Khmer Rouge. The National Liberation Front, wracked by internal bickering, is the smallest of the three groups. Prince Ranariddh dismissed it, along with many members of the exiled Cambodian middle class who, he said, ''struggle from the coffeehouses of Paris and New York.'' The Prince talked about his ''Solarz projects'' - paid for with about $4 million in United States aid for which Representative Steven J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on East Asia, was a key Congressional sponsor. The Prince said the money had bought medicine, clothes and radios. He said more money would allow the Voice of the Khmers, a 10-kilowatt radio station, to be upgraded to reach all of Cambodia. He said there could be no military victory against the Vietnamese. His only hope, he said, was to ''mobilize the people'' into noncooperation and sabotage. He said more money was needed to ''win hearts'' by sending medical teams into the Cambodian countryside and outbidding the Vietnamese for Cambodian farmers' rice. Erosion of Culture Prince Ranariddh reserves his most eloquent anguish for the erosion of Khmer culture. ''A lot of people talk just about the war in Cambodia,'' he said. ''But there is another process: the Vietnamization of Cambodia.'' ''There are 700,000 Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia, and they are exploiting our soil,'' he said. ''Even in the very small villages, there are already Vietnamese merchants. They buy rice from our people at very low prices and send it on trucks back to Vietnam.'' ''The Vietnamese have rewritten our bilateral history,'' he went on, adding that in almost every area of culture subtle changes were taking place ''that the foreigner does not see.'' On a note pad, he sketched the evolution of classical dance students' costumes from a traditional Khmer to a Vietnamese style. ''The Vietnamese have tried to Vietnamize us many times in history,'' the Prince said. ''But this time is more dangerous.'' ''They are supported by the very powerful Soviet Union,'' he said. ''They also have an ideology, the Communist ideology, that is very powerful. France colonized us just economically. But now the colonization is political, physical.'' ''Maybe,'' he said ''and I hope not - this is the beginning of the end of the ethnic Khmer nation.''  BANGKOK JOURNAL  Correction:  January 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
