478|1987\01\03|WASHINGTON TALK: United States Railway Association; A Bureaucratic Caboose, as It Were|When major railroads in the Northeast and Middle West began going into bankruptcy in quick order in the early 1970's, Congress stepped in to try to reverse the trend and salvage rail service in those regions.|When major railroads in the Northeast and Middle West began going into bankruptcy in quick order in the early 1970's, Congress stepped in to try to reverse the trend and salvage rail service in those regions. When major railroads in the Northeast and Middle West began going into bankruptcy in quick order in the early 1970's, Congress stepped in to try to reverse the trend and salvage rail service in those regions. It enacted the Railroad Revitalization Act of 1973, giving the Government broad authority to take over seven bankrupt carriers, to settle stockholders' and debtors' claims against them and to develop a new rail system from their assets. The railroad act also created the United States Railway Association, which was assigned the bulk of the work and was set up to serve as Congress's independent superagency for railroad revitalization. 'A Pretty Good Job' The agency assembled planners in marketing and rail service who developed a master plan for what became the Consolidated Rail Corporation, more commonly known as Conrail. It went on to monitor Conrail's long and troubled road to profitability, making recommendations for adjustments in Federal policy along the way to help the carrier. The agency also hired a battery of lawyers to handle lawsuits on claims. Today railroad service in the regions is healthier than it has been in decades, and now the U.S.R.A. is working on its final assignment: shutting down. Some people are a bit nostalgic about it while others are somewhat elated. Whatever the case, the railway agency is, ultimately, that rarest of Washington rarities - a bureaucracy that is going out of business instead of growing like a summer weed. ''The historical record is that they did a pretty good job,'' said Deputy Transportation Secretary James H. Burnley 4th, who often found himself at odds with the agency in recent years as it warned Congress not to go along with the Transportation Department's plan to sell Conrail to a private buyer. ''During their early years they played a valuable role,'' Mr. Burnley said. ''But in the last three years, it's been sort of an agency with no mission. It just sat on the sidelines and carped.'' Congressional approval last fall of the sale of the Government's 85 percent interest in Conrail eliminated the need for the agency to exist. It will be closed April 1. ''No one expected us to be in business this long,'' said Cary Dickieson, one of the agency's original staff members, who also served as its executive vice president for six years. ''When it was first set up, people thought it would be in business for about three years.'' But, as Mr. Dickieson and others noted, that forecast would prove incorrect. Just settling the nearly $17 billion in claims against the seven bankrupt railroads took the better part of nine years. At the height of the litigation, when the railway agency had a staff of 400 employees and a budget of $30 million, nearly two-thirds of those employees were lawyers working on claims. Meanwhile, turning a handful of failed railroads into a single profitable line took almost as long as settling the lawsuits. The agency's initial goal of achieving a profitable operation in just a few years fell short because of declining rail traffic in the regions and an economic slide that dominated the economy in most of the late 1970's and into the early 1980's. The turnaround did not come before the railway agency and the Reagan Administration squared off over Conrail's future, a battle that has since kept the two at odds. When President Reagan took office, his Administration proposed dismantling Conrail and selling its pieces so as to end a mounting Federal subsidy. But the railway agency persuaded Congress in 1981 to adopt legislation aimed at giving Conrail one last chance to succeed. $1 Billion in the Bank The legislation made it easier for Conrail to abandon trackage, dismiss workers and cut costs in other ways. That same year, L. Stanley Crane, former chief executive of the Southern Railway System, became chief executive of Conrail. Today, Conrail is one of the most profitable railroads in the country, with about $1 billion in profits in the bank, and it will be sold in a public stock offering as one company rather than in pieces. The low-profile railway agency has been given a lot of the credit in this effort. ''They did their job very well,'' said Representative James J. Florio, the New Jersey Democrat who played a key role on railroad issues as chairman of the Subcommittee on Commerce, Transportation and Tourism of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. ''They were the objective information generators for Congress,'' Mr. Florio said, adding that the agency was not liked by the Reagan Administration ''because U.S.R.A. was committed to a viable Conrail.''
