479|1987\01\03|A Seasoned Counselor: Peter Lenard Zimroth|Early in 1980, Peter L. Zimroth, then chief assistant to the Manhattan District Attorney, was considering two job offers, one to join a small Wall Street law firm and the other to become Mayor Koch's criminal-justice coordinator.|Early in 1980, Peter L. Zimroth, then chief assistant to the Manhattan District Attorney, was considering two job offers, one to join a small Wall Street law firm and the other to become Mayor Koch's criminal-justice coordinator. Early in 1980, Peter L. Zimroth, then chief assistant to the Manhattan District Attorney, was considering two job offers, one to join a small Wall Street law firm and the other to become Mayor Koch's criminal-justice coordinator. Mr. Zimroth turned down the Mayor's offer. Instead, he entered private practice, after 14 years as a prosecutor and law professor, ''to get more breadth as a lawyer,'' Mr. Zimroth recalled yesterday after Mr. Koch named him the city's new Corporation Counsel. Despite that concern of seven years ago, Mr. Zimroth's resume and interviews with his friends suggest that diversity has long been one of his greatest assets. ''I think I'm a very good lawyer, I do,'' Mr. Zimroth said in an interview after a brief news conference in the Mayor's City Hall office. ''And I've had a very broad experience in the law. ''I've been a prosecutor, a defense lawyer, a teacher. I've been an administrator. And I really feel very strongly about using the law as an instrument for social good. That's why I became a lawyer.'' In Past, a Top Advisory Post The Mayor's two previous Corporation Counsels - Allen G. Schwartz and Frederick A. O. Schwarz Jr., who officially left the post Thursday after five years to return to private practice - each became a close adviser to Mr. Koch on matters of general policy as well as of law. Mr. Koch said yesterday that he hoped Mr. Zimroth would ''occupy the same role that they occupied.'' Mr. Zimroth, a 43-year-old native of Brooklyn, was offered the job Monday and accepted it Tuesday. He said he had not yet formulated specific ideas or themes that he might emphasize as the city's top lawyer and head of an office of 500 lawyers. In addition to defending the city, he said, he hoped ''to use the law in an imaginative way.'' Mr. Zimroth also said that he thought the city corruption scandal was ''more a challenge than a liability'' to someone entering the administration, because it provided an opportunity to work toward fundamental changes in government and politics. Friends said Mr. Zimroth's tenure as the top assistant to District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan from 1977 to 1980 would serve him well in his new job. 'Experience in Public Issues' ''He's had a lot of experience in the kinds of public issues that the Mayor's lawyer needs to consider,'' said Judge Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court in Manhattan, an old friend and colleague. Born Jan. 11, 1943, Peter Lenard Zimroth was raised in the Bensonhurst and Sheepshead Bay sections. His father, Sol, owned a dry-cleaning store in Brooklyn, and later sold insurance and mutual funds. His mother, Ruth, was a homemaker during his youth and later worked as a bookkeeper. His parents now live in Connecticut, as does his sister, Alice. Mr. Zimroth graduated from Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn, Columbia College and Yale Law School. He was editor in chief of The Yale Law Journal. He was a law clerk to Chief Judge David L. Bazelon of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, then to Justice Abe Fortas of the Supreme Court of the United States. Mr. Zimroth worked as an assistant United States Attorney in Manhattan for several years before joining the law school faculty at New York University in 1970. He taught courses on the Federal courts, criminal law and criminal procedure and attained the rank of professor. A Reunion With Morgenthau In 1974, he published a book, ''Perversions of Justice,'' about political trials in the United States during the late 1960's and early 1970's. In 1975, he rejoined Mr. Morgenthau - under whom he had worked in the United States Attorney's office in the late 1960's - in the District Attorney's office. Since entering private practice in 1980, he has specialized in criminal and civil litigation. Mr. Zimroth described the practice as ''a broadening experience.'' ''The demands of the courts and clients are really different from those in public life,'' he said. ''Every case that you have, you have to learn a new thing, a new business, a new industry.'' Robert S. Fink, a partner with Mr. Zimroth in the firm of Kostelanetz & Ritholz, described the new Corporation Counsel as ''a perfectionist.'' Knows How to Relax ''He is an extremely hard worker; he's a workaholic,'' Mr. Fink said. ''He is, I think, a very, very brilliant lawyer. And he is probably the best trainer of young lawyers in our firm.'' While Mr. Zimroth will work through the night when necessary, Mr. Fink said, he also knows how to relax. It was during such a moment that Mr. Zimroth met his wife, the actress Estelle Parsons, 14 years ago. She was filming a movie, ''Four Play,'' at a bar in SoHo and Mr. Zimroth, who accompanied a mutual friend to the set, got a role as an extra. ''And he had those beautiful blue eyes,'' Ms. Parsons said. The couple lived in the same building on Manhattan's Upper West Side but had never met. Married four years, they are still there, with their son, Abraham, who is 3. Mr. Zimroth, who will earn $94,500 a year, said he had taken a ''very substantial'' cut in pay to return to government. Asked how long he expected to remain Corporation Counsel, he answered, ''As long as I can afford it.''  MAN IN THE NEWS
