480|1987\01\03|O'CONNOR TOURS THE HOLOCAUST MUSEUM|Israelis showed John Cardinal O'Connor the grim pictorial record of the Holocaust today, taking him on a tour of Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust museum.|Israelis showed John Cardinal O'Connor the grim pictorial record of the Holocaust today, taking him on a tour of Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust museum. Israelis showed John Cardinal O'Connor the grim pictorial record of the Holocaust today, taking him on a tour of Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust museum. The Israelis were openly hoping the Cardinal would understand the relationship between those horrors and the need for a secure Israel not dependent on the good will of other nations. In remarks to reporters later, the Cardinal suggested that his tour of Yad Vashem had not changed his views on Vatican recognition of Israel. ''I think it's totally irrelevant,'' he said. ''We're talking about an event infinitely beyond such matters. I could talk glibly, and I could use all sorts of political jargon. But this is the mystery of suffering, and we must do what we can to preclude this kind of suffering to the degree possible. Whether that can be brought about by any kind of diplomatic relations, I don't know.'' Views Photos and Documents At Yad Vashem, Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop of New York, saw photographs of rabbis humiliated by Nazi soldiers, of children starving in the Warsaw ghetto, of women stripped to be marched off and shot, of emaciated death camp inmates lying side by side in wooden bunks, of pits filled with piles of corpses. He viewed pictures and documents that told how ships filled with Jews trying to flee such atrocities were turned back by country after country. ''If at that time there had been a Jewish state, things would have been different,'' said his guide, Yitzhak Arad, the chairman of Yad Vashem. The Cardinal walked through the museum silently, nodding his head in disbelief, the pain of what he saw visible in his face. Later, he prayed for five minutes in a memorial hall to the six million Jewish victims of the Nazis, kneeling in front of an eternal flame surrounded by the block-lettered names of the major Nazi extermination camps. Called 'Totally Indescribable' He emerged into a fog-shrouded morning and was asked by reporters to describe his feelings. ''Anything I would say here is banal,'' he said. ''This is totally indescribable. I can't talk about it. It's a mystery to me.'' The Cardinal was invited to Israel in September after he made a public appeal for a Palestinian homeland. Israeli leaders hoped that by understanding the history of anti-Jewish persecution and Israel's vulnerability in the Arab world, he would appreciate why Israel finds it difficult to make such concessions to the Palestinians as the surrender of the West Bank. The Israelis would also like the Cardinal to understand the injury they feel at the Vatican's refusal to extend full diplomatic relations to Israel and to recognize its control over an undivided Jerusalem. The Vatican would prefer international status for Jerusalem. The injury to Israel was amplified in the last week when the Cardinal first scheduled and then canceled meetings with top Israeli leaders, explaining that the Vatican's policy on Jerusalem forbade him to meet officially with the leaders in Jerusalem. The Cardinal, at a New Year's Day mass in the Old City of Jerusalem, apologized to the Israeli people and Government for the gaffe. Explaining Israel's Fears As the Cardinal stepped into his car, Mr. Arad told him, ''It's impossible to understand Israel's fears and its courage without seeing the background of the Holocaust.'' Later, Mr. Arad, whose parents perished in the Treblinka death camp, said to reporters: ''The lesson we have learned of the Holocaust is what it means to be on the margins of mankind, to be vulnerable, to be dependent on the good will of other people. If someone says to us that they want to push us into the sea, we have to take that seriously.'' Mr. Arad was referring to threatening statements made over the years by some Palestinian leaders and others. The Cardinal said he ''would never dream of contradicting'' Israel's right to exist. Indeed, he said, ''it is my conviction and the conviction of my Pope that Israel has the right to self-determination, the right to defend its borders, the right to want to struggle for freedom.'' Won't Talk About Diplomacy It is an arguable matter, he said, whether Vatican diplomatic recognition would ''preclude such suffering'' as the Holocaust. ''I'm not a high-flown diplomat,'' he said. ''I can't talk intelligently about diplomatic relations.'' But the reality of the Holocaust, he said, ''has chilled me ever since the first day I put my hand into the ovens at Dachau'' during a visit to West Germany. The Holocaust, he said, has deepened his ''commitment to the sacredness of every human person.'' ''This is why I speak out so passionately about the unborn, because I think they're human, about the crippled and diseased, about Jews and Arabs,'' he said. ''If the Nazis had really believed that, do you think the Holocaust would have happened?'' At Yad Vashem, the Cardinal was shown the tree-lined Avenue of the Righteous dedicated to 5,000 non-Jews, some of them Roman Catholic priests, who helped conceal Jews or otherwise rescued them from the Nazis. But reporters also asked him about criticism that the Vatican had failed at the time to speak out about the brutalities against Jews. ''I don't know what the church did or did not do,'' the Cardinal said. ''We now know it's my responsibility to prevent this kind of suffering for Jews and for all people.'' Church Silence Faulted After the Cardinal left, Mr. Arad took a different view. ''All of us know about the silence of the church at that time,'' he said. ''If the church had raised its voice, many more Jews would have survived. It would have caused more Christians to help Jews, and Jewish survival often depended on the local population.'' Later in the morning, the Cardinal, 66 years old, met for an hour and a half with Zevulon Hammer, the Minister of Religious Affairs. The Cardinal had concluded that Mr. Hammer was the highest-ranking Israeli that he was permitted to meet officially in Jerusalem under Vatican guidelines. Mr. Hammer said afterward that the Cardinal had spoken to him about the possibility of arranging some informal meetings outside of the official buildings of Jerusalem with President Chaim Herzog and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. Mr. Hammer, however, suggested that such meetings would be difficult because Israel did not want to set precedents that would later allow foreign officials and diplomatic representatives to ''boycott Jerusalem.'' As he left the meeting with Mr. Hammer, Cardinal O'Connor was asked why he felt Vatican guidelines permitted him to meet with Mr. Hammer but not with other Israeli officials. He replied, ''There are no implications in my coming here, because religion is sacred and common to both of us.'' Won't Meet With Peres For the first time, the Cardinal said definitively that according to his reading of Vatican guidelines, he would not be able to meet with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres in his Jerusalem office. It was Mr. Peres, while in New York last September, who originally invited the Cardinal to come to Israel, and the Cardinal had earlier indicated that a return courtesy call to Mr. Peres might not violate Vatican protocol. The Cardinal met earlier this week with King Hussein of Jordan, whose country the Vatican also does not recognize diplomatically. He explained that he could meet the King but not the Prime Minister or President of Israel because diplomatic recognition was not at issue. Only the status of Jerusalem is at issue, he said. The Cardinal said he had also discussed his visit to Yad Vashem with Mr. Hammer. ''I mentioned to the Minister,'' he said, ''that it might well be that the Holocaust may be an enormous gift that Judaism has given to the world.'' The suffering, the Cardinal explained, taught the world of the ''sacredness and dignity of every human person.''
