489|1987\01\03|SOUTH AFRICANS REPORT 3 BLACKS BURNED TO DEATH|Three blacks were burned to death and a white soldier was shot and wounded by black radicals near Johannesburg on New Year's Day, the South African authorities reported today. Editor's Note: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or ''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.|Three blacks were burned to death and a white soldier was shot and wounded by black radicals near Johannesburg on New Year's Day, the South African authorities reported today. Three blacks were burned to death and a white soldier was shot and wounded by black radicals near Johannesburg on New Year's Day, the South African authorities reported today. The Bureau for Information, the government's sole source of information on unrest, said in a daily bulletin that a black man and a black woman were set on fire and killed by about 20 blacks in the Emdeni district of Soweto on Thursday. Soweto, home to two million people, is the township that provides black labor for white-run Johannesburg. In another part of Soweto called White City, the bureau said, about 90 people burned a black woman to death. In Kwanobuhle township, near Uitenhage in the Eastern Cape, another black man was found with burns to the head and upper body but still alive. Burnings Are Favored Burning has become a favored form of execution by black militants against those they deem to be collaborators with white authority. The violence erupted despite a state of emergency in force since June 12 that was designed to curb unrest in part by giving the security forces wide powers. It is estimated that 22,000 people have been detained for varying periods without charge or trial. Since September 1984, more than 2,300 people have been killed in protest and violence, hundreds of them in what the authorities once called black-on-black violence. Since last month, when the nation's emergency regulations were tightened to include strict censorship and the banning of residual forms of black protest, the Bureau for Information has cast such violence in more ideological terms, calling the perpetrators ''black radicals.'' The bureau said that shortly after midnight on New Year's Day, ''black radicals'' opened fire on a young white soldier in Alexandra township, a tangled warren of slums and homes situated near Johannesburg's wealthiest suburbs. The soldier, who was not identified, was said to have been seriously wounded. Alexandra is one of the most defiant of South Africa's black townships. Last February more than 20 people died in riots and fighting there. Editor's Note: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or ''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.
