490|1987\01\03|CONNER BOAT GAINS CHALLENGER FINALS|Tom Blackaller bowed out of the America's Cup competition today, confident that his longtime rival, Dennis Conner, would go on to beat New Zealand in the challenger finals.|Tom Blackaller bowed out of the America's Cup competition today, confident that his longtime rival, Dennis Conner, would go on to beat New Zealand in the challenger finals. Tom Blackaller bowed out of the America's Cup competition today, confident that his longtime rival, Dennis Conner, would go on to beat New Zealand in the challenger finals. Blackaller's USA lost the day's race to Conner's Stars & Stripes by 43 seconds. And when Chris Dickson's New Zealand defeated Marc Pajot's French Kiss by 2 minutes 44 seconds, it meant that both Stars & Stripes and New Zealand had completed four-race sweeps in the challenger semifinals. They will begin competing against each other Jan. 13 in a four-of-seven-race final round whose winner will challenge for the cup the Australians won in 1983. ''I have a lot better feel for how fast Stars & Stripes is and of the improvements they have made, at least relative to us,'' Blackaller said after today's defeat. ''I think Stars & Stripes is going to represent the United States very well in the trials, and I'd be surprised if Stars & Stripes doesn't become challenger.'' Had Been Bitter Rivals The comment was unexpected, considering the past rancor between the West Coast skippers - Conner, from San Diego, and Blackaller, from San Francisco. But Blackaller seemed able to put that behind him today. He offered Conner the use of any equipment that might be useful in his races against New Zealand. Conner had made structural changes to Stars & Stripes for the semifinals, and USA was the first boat to feel the new power. Blackaller conceded that USA was slower, although not far off the pace. ''I think that what we did was a creditable effort - not good enough obviously - but I don't feel let down at all,'' said Blackaller. ''I think that we took the strongest technology swipe at this thing that anybody took, and I'm very proud of that effort.'' Blackaller faulted his team for starting too late - at least a year behind most other syndicates. That, coupled with a budget that was half of Conner's $15 million effort, put him at a disadvantage. French Boat Lacked Speed The French, who decided on a winged keel approach, failed for different reasons. They came here last October with a boat they trusted. But when it came down to a one-on-one sparring with New Zealand, the boat wasn't fast enough, even with changes. Dickson, whose won-lost record of 37-1 outweighs Conner's 31-7 in three months of trial racing, seemed unconcerned today about a potential threat from Stars & Stripes. His boat, also known as Kiwi Magic, has beaten boats in every wind condition, whereas Stars & Stripes tends to lose races in winds under 16 knots. ''All we have to go on is the three races we have had to date with Stars & Stripes,'' Dickson said, noting that the Conner boat was the only one to beat him. ''They're certainly different to what they were, and we're certainly a different boat as well.'' Conner appeared at a post-race news conference and said: ''We haven't sailed long enough in these conditions to know who will come out ahead. But I think we're both reaching the top of our game at the right time.'' Stars & Stripes led USA round the 24-mile race course today, except for one brief interlude when USA moved two boat lengths ahead. The seas were choppy, with a 16-knot sea breeze at the start blossoming into 24 knots two-thirds into the race. Blackaller's boat caught a fresher breeze on the right side of the course, along with a stretch of calmer water. But his gain didn't last long. Conner moved in from the left, dipping his boat under USA's stern with so much way that Blackaller had little choice but to tack for clear air.  KOOKABURRA III RALLIES TO WIN There was high drama in the defenders' races today as well. Kookaburra III came from behind in the last leg of her race with Australia IV to win by 17 seconds. A fitting at the head of the mainsail ripped loose on Australia IV in the final minutes. In a race with Kookaburra II, the mainsail of the 12-Meter Steak 'n Kidney was ripped open. Steak 'n Kidney, a Sydney boat, had to finish under a headsail alone and lost the race by two minutes. Tied for first place in the defenders' round-robin, with 65 points each, are Australia IV and Kookaburra III. AMERICA'S CUP
