491|1987\01\03|LOTS TO PROVE FOR JETS, BROWNS|In so many ways, today's American Conference divisional clash is more than a big playoff game for the Jets and the Browns.|In so many ways, today's American Conference divisional clash is more than a big playoff game for the Jets and the Browns. In so many ways, today's American Conference divisional clash is more than a big playoff game for the Jets and the Browns. The Jets see it as a chance for vindication, a stamp of approval that this season was not wasted. ''We beat Kansas City, and people say we beat the team with the 28th-worst offense,'' said Barry Bennett, the defensive tackle. ''What will they say when we beat Cleveland?'' But this game - with the winner facing either Denver or New England for the American Conference championship and a berth in the Super Bowl - is not a war of words. It is a game for the field. If the Jets are attempting to prove that their 10-1 start was genuine -and overshadow the five-game losing streak that ended their regular season - the Browns are attempting to enter the National Football League's upper echelon. Playoff Losing Streak Their 12-4 mark was the conference's best. But they have not won a playoff game since 1969, losing five. Last year, as the Central Division winner with a laugh-provoking 8-8 mark, they were knocked out in the conference semifinals by the Miami Dolphins. The A.F.C.'s Central Division champion has been defeated after one playoff game each of the last three years. But while the Jets were dropping their final five games this season, the Browns were winning their last five, including a pair in overtime. Little wonder that the Browns are favored by as many as 7 points. On the field it may not be so easy for the Browns. There could be a standoff between the teams in what are likely to be the game's two key elements: the Browns' passing and the Jets' rushing. Offensively, the Jets have been clicking with a running game, and the Browns are vulnerable there. Cleveland's defense against the run is mediocre, allowing opponents 4 yards a carry with a ranking of 18th in the league. In their losses, the Browns yielded 193 rushing yards to the Chicago Bears, 257 to the Cincinnati Bengals, 96 to the weak Green Bay Packers and 121 to the Los Angeles Raiders. The running game is a part of the Jets' offense that is surging. And in the playoffs, what is working now is all that matters. Element of Surprise It is the kind of offense that Pat Ryan can lead so well. Yet, it is apparent that Coach Joe Walton knows exactly what the Browns are thinking: stop Freeman McNeil. So Walton is likely to attempt some surprises with Ryan, whose reputation does not include the big-passing game. With a Cleveland defense not expecting it, though, there could be some surprises. Certainly, with Wesley Walker and Al Toon, the big-play threat is there. And just as McNeil has become a hot runner, Ryan is a hot quarterback following a confident, mistake-free victory over Kansas City in the wild-card playoff last Sunday. The big tackler on the Browns is their left ouside linebacker, Chip Banks, who also is a feared pass-rusher. His presence makes the blocking of Tony Paige, the Jets' fullback, extremely important for deeper passing. Also, the blocking of Gordon King, the right tackle, takes on a significant dimension in the face of Banks's rush. King also will be tied up with Reggie Camp, the left end, while Carl Hairston, right end and the Browns' leader in sacks with nine, will be matched against Jim Sweeney, the Jets' left tackle. The Jet defense may experience the frenzy that can affect teams that face an offense directed by Lindy Infante. He once was the Bengals' offensive coordinator, putting in what seemed like miles of pass routes run by Ken Anderson's receivers. With the Browns, he has done much the same. Bernie Kosar, the quarterback, directed an attack in which 7 receivers each snared at least 28 passes. Brian Brennan, once Doug Flutie's favorite receiver at Boston College, was the team leader with 55 receptions. A Jet Weakness Of course, the pass is the bete noire of the Jet defense. Opposing passers completed almost 58 percent of their attempts, averaged more than 7.5 yards a throw, and tossed 35 touchdown passes. In Kosar, the Jets will face a quarterback who led all passers with the fewest interceptions and who makes quick, intelligent decisions. The Jets' line must pressure him, or else the Jets' secondary will have to pressure his receivers to take them out of their routes. Russell Carter will be defending the Jets' right corner. ''A lot of guys spread the ball around a lot,'' Carter said, ''but Kosar is very decisive where he's going. You don't have much time. He's getting rid of every mistake on your part.'' The antidote? ''The coverage will have to be a little tighter, and get the receivers off their timing,'' Carter said. That can be done with an aggressive bump-and-run. It is unlikely to be accomplished by shooting defensive backs or linebackers toward Kosar. With his quick reads, he will spot an uncovered receiver. It means that the Jets' defensive line, which has no one with more than three sacks, will be alone in applying pressure against a quarterback sacked only seven times in the last five games.  O'BRIEN READY Walton said he would not hesitate to bring in Ken O'Brien for any reason. ''They've both worked fine,'' Walton said. ''Kenny's knuckle would bother him the rest of the season, but it's a little better.'' O'Brien hurt his pinkie three games ago. Ryan hurt his upper arm against the Chiefs. . . . In the Jets' playoff history, they have won two of their four games on the road. . . . Johnny Hector is unlikely to play, Walton said. That would again leave virtually all the running to McNeil.
