492|1987\01\03|Rangers Welcome Carpenter|He was ushered past television crews and reporters, he shook hands with a few people he did not know, and finally he landed at the entrance to Phil Esposito's office. Esposito, in his stocking feet, came to the door, took one look at Bobby Carpenter, threw up his hands, and said, ''Hallelujah.''|He was ushered past television crews and reporters, he shook hands with a few people he did not know, and finally he landed at the entrance to Phil Esposito's office. Esposito, in his stocking feet, came to the door, took one look at Bobby Carpenter, threw up his hands, and said, ''Hallelujah.'' He was ushered past television crews and reporters, he shook hands with a few people he did not know, and finally he landed at the entrance to Phil Esposito's office. Esposito, in his stocking feet, came to the door, took one look at Bobby Carpenter, threw up his hands, and said, ''Hallelujah.'' Carpenter arrived at the Rangers' training camp this afternoon and -this is not a passing item - was welcomed. He was too late to meet his new teammates, but he heard more glad-to-have-you's than he had in some time. After six weeks in an exiled state with the Washington Capitals, he had a twofold reaction to the reception, first saying he was ''really happy to get to a team where I want to play.'' Then he fired off some searing remarks about his old team and, in particular, his former coach, Bryan Murray. ''I'm the lucky one to get out of there,'' he said. ''Lots of players said, 'Take me with you.' They're fed up with his attitude and the way he's coaching. He played head games with you and he panicked on the bench, yelling. Players reacted to that. It's a mess. The whole management down there is a mess.'' Reached by telephone tonight, Murray said he was reluctant to engage in a public squabble. ''I don't have to be in a position to defend myself,'' he said. ''I'll say this, he's putting pressure on himself with these comments.'' Out of Action Since Nov. 22 Thus, Carpenter's silence on the most peculiar period in his life officially ended. He was the Capitals' first choice in the 1981 entry draft and he never played a day in the minor leagues, but he last played hockey on Nov. 22 and then things turned sour. Three days later, the Capitals' general manager, David Poile, called him to his office and said he need not practice with the club any longer, that he should go home and await a trade later in the day. He waited and he waited and while Poile and Murray said he had a poor attitude and painted him as a prima donna they could no longer control, Carpenter said nothing. He waited until New Year's Day, when he found out he had been sent to the Rangers for Mike Ridley, Kelly Miller, and Bobby Crawford. The Rangers also received Washington's second-round draft selection for 1989. Carpenter, 23 years old, a 53-goal scorer just two seasons back, said he was genuinely thrilled to be with the Rangers. Two years ago, when he was a free agent, he came closer to coming to the Rangers, he said, but Craig Patrick, then the general manager, thought the compensation price too high. After all the talks between Poile and Esposito over the last month and a half Carpenter will make his debut with the Rangers Saturday night in Quebec as a center -the Capitals had been using him at left wing - on a line with Mark Osborne and Pierre Larouche, another former 50-goal scorer. If he is not yet game-ready, Esposito said he would spot him into the lineup on face-offs. Carpenter will wear No. 11, a change from No. 10, which belongs to Larouche. Capitals Needed a Forward In actuality, Poile had been talking with several clubs about moving the player. But a few circumstances brought him and Esposito rushing together on Thursday morning. First, key injuries had given the Capitals, who are in last place in the Patrick Division, an urgent need at the forward position. Esposito had forwards to give up, and Esposito had reportedly heard that the Devils were close to acquiring Carpenter. In any case, in the last several days Esposito had become convinced that Carpenter was one of the key pieces the Rangers needed to become a quality team. He said today that with him, he thought there was a possibility the team could finish second or third. ''More realistically,'' he added, ''third or fourth.'' Anytime a team gives up three players for one, especially if the one has a sullied reputation, it is a gamble. But quality players are usually obtained only when they are leaving clouded situations. Esposito had this one opportunity and he grabbed it. Carpenter started his day at 5 A.M. He missed the 7 o'clock shuttle for New York because of a road accident that slowed traffic. He spent most of the morning undergoing physical examinations at Lenox Hill Hospital along with Coach Tom Webster, who visited with his doctors. Webster Recovering Webster was told he was recovering well from surgery for an inner-ear infection. He will return behind the bench Monday night at Madison Square Garden, but because he is not yet permitted to fly, Webster will not coach the team against the Nordiques Saturday night. Carpenter, who had played in 422 consecutive games before his benching, was issued a clean bill. He said his problems were probably precipitated when Murray first took over. ''He told me I didn't come into the league the right way,'' said Carpenter. He said, 'I'll teach you.' '' He said the decision to remain silent while the Capitals' management talked was calculated. ''They put themselves in a bind,'' he said. ''They look like fools and we sat back and didn't say anything. They were losing and I was happy to be their scapegoat. They're playing worse now.'' Rod Langway, the Capitals' captain, had this response to Carpenter's remarks: ''Bobby has to look at himself in the mirror. If you feel that way in your heart, obviously it's going to affect your play, but I didn't hear a lot of complaints from him when he was scoring 53 goals.''
