493|1987\01\03|AMATO ACTS TO STOP PAYMENT OF BONUSES TO SHAPIRO AIDES|Essex County's new chief executive, Nicholas R. Amato, is trying to block payment of about $500,000 in bonuses to outgoing aides of his predecessor, Peter Shapiro.|Essex County's new chief executive, Nicholas R. Amato, is trying to block payment of about $500,000 in bonuses to outgoing aides of his predecessor, Peter Shapiro. Essex County's new chief executive, Nicholas R. Amato, is trying to block payment of about $500,000 in bonuses to outgoing aides of his predecessor, Peter Shapiro. The payments, which amount to about 80 percent of what employees in managerial positions paid in Social Security taxes last year, were to have been made to those on the county payroll as of Jan. 31, 1987. However, in November, after his election defeat, Mr. Shapiro signed an executive order changing the date to Dec. 31, 1986. Mr. Amato called the change ''underhanded.'' ''He knew exactly what he was doing,'' Mr Amato said in an interview on his first working day in office. ''It was not the innocent people he was worried about. He was trying to make sure that his elite guard got it. It's kind of odd that the only checks that were given out and cashed were certain checks to his privileged few.'' No Money Appropriated H. Curtis Meanor, a former Federal District Court judge who Mr. Amato has named as acting County Counsel, said that payment on the 234 checks had been stopped, but that between 13 and 20 of them had been cashed. He said that no money had been appropriated to pay for the bonuses. ''They were charged to the 1986 budget and there is no appropriation in the 1986 budget,'' Mr. Meanor said. ''There is a question as to whether Peter Shapiro acted within his authority. If the old eligibility date can be established, they are not entitled to anything.'' Reached at his home, Mr. Shapiro said the payments were primarily to employees in management and technical positions to compensate for the fact that they were not unionized and did not receive union benefits. As to the Dec. 31 date on the checks, he said this ''was done incorrectly and against my instructions.'' 'Up to Monkey Business' ''That was sabotage from within,'' he added. ''My instructions were that the payment was to be part of the Jan. 2 paycheck. As soon as I heard that there were special checks dated December 31, I knew that somebody was up to monkey business.'' However, Mr. Meanor said, ''It is clear to me that Mr. Shapiro, by adjusting the date, sought to protect the bonus for those confidential employees who he knew would probably be replaced early in the new administration.'' Mr. Amato added that notices would be sent to those individuals who had cashed the checks advising them that stop-payment orders had been issued. The matter is to come before the courts on Monday, but Mr. Meanor said the matter was moot unless employees sued for payment of the money. Mr. Amato, who was sworn in Thursday, said his day included meetings with several new staff members -Robert D. Jackson, a management analyst with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey who had been on loan to Mayor Sharpe James of Newark; Brenda J. Veltri, who resigned as Newark's director of personnel to accept a similar position with the county, and Peter J. McDonough, a former administrative assistant to Congressman Dean A. Gallo, who was appointed acting chief of staff. Mr. Amato also met with several holdovers - Joseph A. Martin, the county administrator, and Donald V. Biase, the budget director. The meetings were to complete plans for personnel changes.
