495|1987\01\03|RIVAL AIDS CAMPEAU IN ALLIED DEAL|The Campeau Corporation, in a struggle to complete its $3.6 billion purchase of the Allied Stores Corporation, got financing help from a rival bidder for Allied, two of the parties said yesterday.|The Campeau Corporation, in a struggle to complete its $3.6 billion purchase of the Allied Stores Corporation, got financing help from a rival bidder for Allied, two of the parties said yesterday. The Campeau Corporation, in a struggle to complete its $3.6 billion purchase of the Allied Stores Corporation, got financing help from a rival bidder for Allied, two of the parties said yesterday. Also, Allied has decided to sell by June 16 of its retail chains that provided 38 percent of its sales. They include Bonwit Teller and Garfinckel's. The 16 divisions generated 12 percent of store profits during 1985. The Edward J. DeBartolo Corporation, which sided with Allied to prevent Campeau's takeover, will get a 35 percent interest in what remains of Allied at a cost of $210 million. The financing deals give analysts more reason to question whether Campeau stretched itself too thin to acquire the larger Allied Corporation, which has 691 department and specialty stores in 46 states. Campeau, a Canadian-based builder and shopping center developer, agreed to acquire Allied in November. The Campeau-Allied plans were disclosed in a prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and in a joint release from Campeau and DeBartolo. Under bank agreements, Allied is required to sell the divisions ''as soon as possible'' to pay off $300 million in debt. Allied said it would not sell other retail units, including Brooks Brothers, Ann Taylor and the Jordan Marsh department stores. It did not specify all 16 divisions that it would sell. The S.E.C. filing also shows that Allied plans securities offerings that would raise more than $1 billion for additional financing. These offerings include $600 million in senior subordinated debentures, $200 million of senior notes and 10 million shares of cumulative exchangeable preferred stock. The company said that besides 16 divisions, it might be forced to sell other assets to meet loan payments. After the June payment, the company said it owes $500 million by Dec. 31 and a total of $1.1 billion by December 1988. Edward J. DeBartolo, the Ohio developer whose bid for Allied was exceeded by Campeau, is lending Campeau $150 million to help finance the purchase. In their joint news statement, the two companies said that Mr. DeBartolo would have the option of making an additional $60 million payment to Allied and converting his loan into a 35 percent equity interest in Allied, the nation's third-largest department store operator. Moreover, they said the agreement included ''certain benefits to DeBartolo'' that will enable the developer to ''participate directly in the business development of Allied.'' Financial analysts said that Campeau had hurried in order to complete the Allied deal to save millions of dollars in tax benefits that would be lost under the new tax law, which took effect Thursday. Meanwhile, the two developers said that Mr. DeBartolo had agreed to purchase the five regional shopping centers owned by Allied for $400 million, but Campeau has an option to purchase back a 50 percent interest for $200 million by March 31. That would leave Mr. DeBartolo with a 50 percent interest in the shopping centers. Originally he was to purchase a 25 percent interest for $112.5 million.
