498|1987\01\03|U.S. IS CURBING DUTY-FREE PROGRAM|The Reagan Administration announced today that it was ending duty-free access on more than $3 billion in imports from Taiwan, South Korea and six other leaders among the developing countries.|The Reagan Administration announced today that it was ending duty-free access on more than $3 billion in imports from Taiwan, South Korea and six other leaders among the developing countries. The Reagan Administration announced today that it was ending duty-free access on more than $3 billion in imports from Taiwan, South Korea and six other leaders among the developing countries. The announcement was not directly related to the record trade deficit announced on Wednesday, but tariffs will be increased on 290 products from countries whose trade surpluses with the United States are among the largest. The Administration also said it was denying duty-free status for all products coming from Nicaragua, Paraguay and Rumania, citing their poor record on worker rights. Chile's record on worker rights is to be studied for another year before any action is taken, an Administration official said. Because of an American embargo there is practically no trade with Nicaragua. Trade is minimal with Paraguay and Rumania. Analysts said the moves seemed aimed at blunting Congressional criticism of the Administration for not being ''tough'' enough on trade. ''They might help bank some of the protectionist coals,'' said a Senate aide who follows trade issues. Representative Jim Wright, the Texas Democrat who is the new House Speaker, called the moves ''a welcome policy change,'' but added that they ''may not have gone far enough.'' At a news conference earlier in the day, he re-emphasized the high priority the 100th Congress will place on coming to grips with the trade deficit, describing it as the ''first imperative.'' The Administration actions, which are scheduled to take effect July 1, relate to a program of tariff preferences offered since the last decade by leading industrial countries to spur poorer countries' exports and development. The American program, which has been a target of Congressional criticism, grants duty-free treatment on 3,000 products from 140 developing countries. Since its inception in 1976 the annual value of imports receiving duty-free treatment has risen from $3.2 billion, to $13.3 billion in 1985, under the American program. But 90 percent of the benefits go to fewer than a dozen export-oriented countries, mostly in the Pacific Basin. The steps taken today will cut those benefits by an estimated $2 billion, or 23 percent, according to Clayton K. Yeutter, the United States trade representative, who made the announcement for the Administration. While $3.1 billion of trade could be hurt by loss of the duty-free status, $950 million of trade could be helped by the addition of 95 products from 10 countries to the duty-free list under the review the Administration has just concluded. In addition to Taiwan and South Korea, the newly industrialized developing countries subjected to new tariffs include Brazil, Mexico, Singapore, Yugoslavia, Hong Kong and Argentina. The list of 10 gainers includes some of the same countries that will lose on other products. The 10 are Colombia, Hong Kong, South Korea, Macao, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and Uruguay. Taiwan is the biggest net loser. In 1985 it had $3.2 billion of its exports to the United States coming in under the program known as the Generalized System of Preferences. The new level will be $2 billion, based on the 1985 numbers, a reduction of 37.5 percent. Other losers include Brazil, Korea and Mexico. Among the net gainers are Hong Kong, Singapore, the Philippines and Colombia. An official at the Taiwanese Coordination Council for North American Affairs said that ''we understand the situation in view of the political conditions in the United States.'' Trade bills in the House and Senate last year would have cut back the privileges of the preference system sharply. In acting against Paraguay, Rumania and Nicaragua, the Administration acted under 1984 trade legislation calling for termination of preference system eligibility for any country not taking steps toward providing internationally recognized rights to its workers. Mr. Wright said he thought the Administration's actions under the worker rights provisions were ''long overdue'' and said he was disappointed that Chile and South Korea were not also stripped of their eligibility. David P. Shark, executive director of the preference system program in the Office of the United States Trade Representative, said that Chile had taken a number of liberalizing actions over the last two years.
