500|1987\01\03|BOLIVIA COCAINE TRADE REVIVES AFTER G.I.'S GO|At the airport, the hot wind coming off the savanna whistles among rows of small private planes that have not flown in several months, having been grounded by the authorities.|At the airport, the hot wind coming off the savanna whistles among rows of small private planes that have not flown in several months, having been grounded by the authorities. At the airport, the hot wind coming off the savanna whistles among rows of small private planes that have not flown in several months, having been grounded by the authorities. The American troops who landed in July to help combat Bolivia's flourishing cocaine traffic have briefly disrupted the easy life of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, a tropical city that grew prosperous partly from the laundering, recycling and lavish spending of cocaine dollars. After 170 United States troops tracked down drug laboratories in the forests north of here, the flow of cash dried up, the price of coca leaf tumbled and many drug bosses went into hiding. ''The day the troops arrived,'' a resident of Santa Cruz recalled, ''all the Mercedes disappeared from the streets.'' Coca Leaf Price Rises Yet within two months after the American troops left, the cocaine business has bounced back, and by all reports it is operating with greater vigor than ever. The price of the limited supply of coca leaf has gone back up. ''The pressure is off,'' a narcotics expert said. ''Stocks had fallen very low, so now everybody is replenishing.'' Although the troops ruined about 20 laboratories that turned coca paste into cocaine, officials said several large workshops had started up again in the forests of the hinterlands. ''Chemicals were hidden and a new crop of leaf is coming in,'' an official said. ''There is this get-it-while-you-can attitude, because people are unsure what will happen next.'' This new uncertainty has prompted some racketeers to try to sell their more conspicuous assets, like thoroughbred horses and fast cars. As the authorities sort out the use of up to 300 small planes and temporarily ground them, some nervous traffickers have reportedly hurried to disguise ownership. ''We are finding funny things, like planes re-registered in the names of mechanics,'' an official said. Among businessmen and shopkeepers around the Santa Cruz plaza - the city's shaded heart, with the cathedral, the Palace of Justice, the police station and other institutions lined up in Spanish colonial style - the future of the cocaine trade and of its economic spin-offs is very much on people's minds. The debate invariably revolves around whether the American presence has made more than a short-term difference. American and some Bolivian narcotics experts, though saying it may take several years for drug trafficking to disappear here, regard the arrival of the troops as a turning point. They say it showed the willingness of President Victor Paz Estenssoro to pay the high economic and political price of taking on the drug barons. More important than the gains against the traffickers, they believe, the military operations broke the old taboo that fighting the coca trade would be unpalatable. With six American assault helicopters on loan and a reorganized narcotics police, Bolivia can continue its own crackdowns. The less upbeat view of some diplomats and politicians is that despite his commitment, the President can do little to eliminate corruption among the military and the police, particularly in view of the enormous bribes paid. Moreover, the prices of the country's main official exports, natural gas and tin, are badly depressed, and the closing of many tin mines has put tens of thousands out of work. So cocaine revenues - well over $500 million a year by most estimates - have never been more important to Bolivia. One measure of the pull of narcotics, diplomats said, is that the price of coca leaves has risen recently to $150 for a 100-pound bag. Such a bag cost $125 when the United States troops arrived. For Santa Cruz, the outcome of the drug battle will determine whether it enters economic stagnation or maintains its dizzying rate of expansion. The expansion, first through the discovery of oil and then through the cocaine boom, has transformed Santa Cruz from a farming community of 45,000 people two decades ago into Bolivia's second largest city, with a population of more than 600,000. A Recent Phenomenon Although there was always coca leaf in Bolivia's highlands, entrepreneurs in this lowland region caught on to cocaine only over the last 10 years. They recognized that rather than sending the paste of mashed leaves and chemicals for further processing in Colombia, long the world's cocaine center, it was better business for them to do their own refining and exporting. ''First we heard of cocaine in grams, then in kilos, then in tons,'' said Hugo Paz, owner of a local bank. ''Money landed in the hands of people not used to working or producing,'' he said, in explaining the new discotheques, bars, brothels, stores, cockfighting places and even a new indoor arena. The cash flow prompted one local bank to open an offshore branch in Panama's financial district. Local people say many cocaine dollars earned in Europe and the United States are also laundered through the importing of expensive cars and aircraft. With the newly rich seeking different status symbols, some acquisitions seemed unusual. A farmer who acquired sudden wealth began to collect dwarf animals - small bulls from Spain, Shetland ponies and miniature cows from Argentina. ''He has a whole herd of them,'' a neighbor said. ''He told me some of them cost thousands of dollars each.'' One telling side-effect of the crackdown, diplomats say, is a sudden rise in drug-related violence. They believe this confirms that the major operators here are unwilling to surrender without a fight. Several killings have shocked the city. A botanist, his pilot and a guide were shot and killed in October when they accidentally came upon a clandestine laboratory north of here. A member of Congress from Santa Cruz, who promised to reveal the names of the people behind that killing, was then slain in front of his home. Early in December in Cochabamba, a helicopter carrying anti-drug policemen was shot at and forced to make an emergency landing; one passenger was killed. So far, however, no important cocaine boss has been jailed here or elsewhere in Bolivia. Fifteen people arrested here in July, who were said to be important underground figures, have been freed for lack of evidence. The Government has promised changes in the court system and new laws. In Santa Cruz, a new police chief has also been named. ''Good idea,'' said a foreigner who has lived here for almost 30 years. ''But if they want a police chief with clean hands, he may have to be changed every few weeks.''
