501|1987\01\03|Versatile Montana Challenging Giants|Five weeks ago, when the Giants played San Francisco in the regular season, Joe Montana had only recently rejoined the 49ers after back surgery. Still, he completed passes all night, and the Giants were fortunate to rally for a 21-17 victory.|Five weeks ago, when the Giants played San Francisco in the regular season, Joe Montana had only recently rejoined the 49ers after back surgery. Still, he completed passes all night, and the Giants were fortunate to rally for a 21-17 victory. Five weeks ago, when the Giants played San Francisco in the regular season, Joe Montana had only recently rejoined the 49ers after back surgery. Still, he completed passes all night, and the Giants were fortunate to rally for a 21-17 victory. Now the Giants (14-2) and the 49ers (10-5-1), both division champions, will meet at Giants Stadium Sunday in the National Conference playoffs. And now the Giants must contend with a Joe Montana who seems his former self, and that former self was as dangerous a passer as there was in the National Football League. Coach Bill Walsh of the 49ers, perhaps exercising pre-game negative hype, downplays Montana's current form. ''He's not playing up to his standard of recent years,'' said Walsh, ''but he's still a very effective quarterback.'' ''He looks pretty good to me,'' said Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants. ''He looks like he's doing things better than when his back was bothering him.'' Creates Many Problems Montana creates problems for opposing defenses. If he is pressured, he takes short drops and throws quick passes, especially to the dangerous Roger Craig, his fullback. If the linebackers drop back into pass coverage rather than rush Montana, he is not afraid to throw deep, especially to the speedy Jerry Rice. In the regular-season game against the Giants, Montana completed 32 of 52 passes. The longest completion went for only 15 yards and he grossed only 251 yards, small numbers for so many completions. The 49ers intentionally kept their passes short against the Giants' celebrated defense. The 49ers wanted to stop the pass rush, preserve Montana's health and win the game. They succeeded on two out of three. What Walsh will try this time is anyone's guess. ''You just can't do the same things time after time against the Giants,'' he said. ''You have to keep them off balance and not get greedy. We have to be patient and play the game and let it run its course rather than try gimmick or low-percentage plays.'' What will the Giants do to stop Montana? Emphasis on Receivers ''You try to put tight coverage on the receivers early,'' said Parcells. ''You try to jam them. That's always big for us because we're primarily a zone team on defense. He's not going to take sacks early, but if he's trying to catch up or make a first down, he's got to hold the ball to do it.'' When the quarterback throws from a deep drop, it is an invitation to a sack. If his receivers cannot get open, the invitation is still there. ''So you've got to jam them,'' said Carl Banks, the Giants' outside linebacker. ''Obviously, we can't count on getting a lot of sacks, because he drops shorter and throws quicker than most quarterbacks. ''But shorter drops mean shorter passes, which is not necessarily good for us. If we make the tackle immediately and they gain 2 or 3 yards, O.K., but we can't miss tackles. And Montana is very smart and very mobile, and he still isn't afraid to run.'' Strength May Play Role The Giants may attack Montana's passing simply by trying to outplay the 49ers physically. If they try that, it will be because they believe they can play their regular defense and win. ''We can defend most any play they put up there,'' said Gary Reasons, the Giants' inside linebacker. ''They'll make some plays in the long run, but I think we can match up with them. I don't think Bill Parcells will get in a guessing game. I think we'll just do what we do. ''In our last game against them, our run support wasn't good, we missed tackles and across the board we didn't play well. That's why they were able to do some things. I don't think we will do that again.''  WILLIAMS'S ANKLE IMPROVED Perry Williams, the Giants' starting right cornerback, said he was feeling no ill effects from an ankle he turned slightly earlier in the week. . . . Parcells said he had not yet decided whether to reactivate Lionel Manuel Saturday. The star wide receiver has been on injured reserve since he sprained his left knee in the fourth week of the season. . . . The Giants will hold their usual light Saturday workout in the morning at Giants Stadium and the 49ers will do the same in the afternoon. . . . If the Giants beat the 49ers, they will play the conference championship game here the following Sunday against the winner of Saturday's game in Chicago between the Washington Redskins and the Bears. If the Giants are still in the race, said Parcells, they will work out here all week rather than seek a warm-weather training site in the South.
