502|1987\01\03|SUFFOLK CHIEF TO SEEK FISCAL CURBS AND BRAKES FOR COUNTY'S ECONOMY|Michael A. LoGrande, the new chief executive of Suffolk County, today voiced fears about the strength of the soaring local economy and said he would seek ways to reduce county spending.|Michael A. LoGrande, the new chief executive of Suffolk County, today voiced fears about the strength of the soaring local economy and said he would seek ways to reduce county spending. Michael A. LoGrande, the new chief executive of Suffolk County, today voiced fears about the strength of the soaring local economy and said he would seek ways to reduce county spending. In his first State of the County address, Mr. LoGrande, recently selected to fill a one-year vacancy as County Executive, said he planned to appoint an economic advisory council to recommend ways for the government to ''ease off'' growth in the economy. ''The county's economy is operating on a rubber band that is stretched very tautly,'' he said at a news conference after his speech. ''We must ease off or the economy may break.'' Private-sector jobs in the county rose by 94,000, or 33 percent, during the six years ended in September 1985, the Federal Department of Labor reported. Mr. LoGrande's speech was overshadowed, however, by a loud and divisive fight over who would become presiding officer of the County Legislature. Blass Is Victorious That position, which is seen as the county's second most powerful government job, went to the Republican incumbent, Gregory J. Blass, after a battle among Republicans. A Republican caucus agreed on Wednesday to support Gerard J. Glass, a 27-year-old legislator from the Town of Lindenhurst, for the post. The decision of the Republican majority to replace Mr. Blass, who is seen within his party as a maverick, drew about 50 protesters who oppose the opening of the Shoreham nuclear power plant. Mr. Blass has been a more outspoken opponent of the plant than has Mr. Glass, who has also taken an anti-Shoreham stance. The protesters jammed the Legislature's meeting hall today, holding signs and interrupting the meeting. Since his selection as County Executive, Mr. LoGrande, a Republican, has repeatedly stressed his plans to work closely with the Legislature. But his goal appeared to be derailed almost immediately today as he acted as temporary chairman of the organizational session of the Legislature. After Mr. Glass failed to receive a majority of votes on the first ballot, Mr. LoGrande called a recess and left the Legislature's chamber. The Legislature's Democrats called his action ''despicable'' and ''unlawful.'' The decisive votes against Mr. Glass and for Mr. Blass were cast by Patrick A. Mahoney, a Republican from West Islip, who was subsequently elected deputy presiding officer. In his news conference, which was dominated by questions about his call for a recess, Mr. LoGrande defended his move, denying that he had participated in ''backroom politics.'' ''The one thing I did not want to do was get involved with the legislative race for presiding officer,'' he said. ''But signals got crossed every which way.'' Many in the Legislature have criticized the county leadership of the Republican Party for naming Mr. LoGrande to complete the term of Peter F. Cohalan without holding a special election. Mr. Cohalan resigned after winning election to the state judiciary. The Legislature must vote within a month on a Democratic call for a special election for county executive. In his speech, Mr. LoGrande outlined a direction for the county government, which he said ''is at a crossroads.'' He said that within two weeks he planned to direct department heads to cut 5 percent of ''nonmandated'' costs from their budgets. Also, he said he planned to institute a hiring freeze ''that will be sweeping but will allow for critical positions to be filled so as not to interrupt services.''
