503|1987\01\03|KOCH DECLINES BET ON JERSEY'S TEAMS|After years of watching New Yorkers flock to the Meadowlands in New Jersey for Giants' and Jets' football games, Mayor Koch says he has had enough.|After years of watching New Yorkers flock to the Meadowlands in New Jersey for Giants' and Jets' football games, Mayor Koch says he has had enough. After years of watching New Yorkers flock to the Meadowlands in New Jersey for Giants' and Jets' football games, Mayor Koch says he has had enough. The Mayor said yesterday that he would not accept phone calls from other mayors who want to bet on games involving the teams and that the teams should change their names to include ''New Jersey.'' ''I believe in truth in packaging,'' he said. Mr. Koch said he wishes the teams success in their playoff games this weekend, but said he told Mayor Dianne Feinstein of San Francisco that ''she had the wrong telephone number'' when she sought to repeat their bet of last year. ''I told her to call Governor Kean of New Jersey or the Mayor of Moonachie,'' Mr. Koch said. He mispronounced the name, calling it ''mah-NOO-chee'' instead of ''moo-NAH-key,'' but professed to have great affection for the town of 3,000, a few miles from Giants Stadium in the Meadowlands. Mayor Frederick J. Dressler of Moonachie said, ''I'll take the bet - if Mayor Feinstein calls - but I'll make my own and not follow up what Koch did.'' The bet he proposes? ''I'll sing 'I Left My Heart in San Francisco' if they win, and she'll have to sing our town song if the Giants win.'' The song, ''Moonachie,'' was written by a teacher for the town's 75th anniversary celebration in 1985. Looking at a 'Pig in a Poke' Mayor Feinstein's deputy press secretary, Bill Strawn, said she decided not to follow through with the Moonachie offer after Mr. Koch turned her down. ''She was a little surprised because he agreed to bet last year and she sent him a dozen prime steaks after the Giants won,'' he said. ''She enjoys these wagers.'' Of his bet last year, Mr. Koch said, ''I was overly generous, but now I look at every pig in a poke.'' He said he has decided that what is in the poke belongs to New Jersey, not to New York. Mr. Kean said ''it would be nice'' if the Jets and Giants would change their names - ''Jersey Jets and Giants has a nice ring to it'' - but he added, ''I call them that anyway, and always have.'' The teams have removed the ''NY'' logo from their helmets and call themselves ''the Jets'' and ''the Giants,'' although they are referred to as New York teams by the rest of the league. That has rankled New Jersey officials, who placed a large decal on the 50-yard line in Giants Stadium that has a map of the state ringed by the words ''New Jersey Meadowlands.'' Mr. Kean said he is not looking for bets but he will accept them starting in the next round. ''I have to be careful; with two teams in the playoffs I might have to bet double or nothing.'' ''Someday we're going to have two teams in the Super Bowl,'' he said. ''If that happens soon I'll have to sit somewhere in the middle of the stadium.''
