504|1987\01\03|JOHNSTOWN SEEKS TO COPE IN CRISIS|Contractors plowed and salted about 8 inches of snow on streets here today as special state police patrols and a reduced Fire Department reported no major incidents in the second day of a walkout by municipal workers.|Contractors plowed and salted about 8 inches of snow on streets here today as special state police patrols and a reduced Fire Department reported no major incidents in the second day of a walkout by municipal workers. Contractors plowed and salted about 8 inches of snow on streets here today as special state police patrols and a reduced Fire Department reported no major incidents in the second day of a walkout by municipal workers. ''Everything's normal,'' said Capt. Tom Petrore, one of five police officers still working. ''The state police are taking care of all the calls. We've had some accidents and a couple of break-ins, but that's normal.'' The City Finance Director, Calvin D. McCracken, shoveled snow from the steps of City Hall, where code enforcement offices were closed and other agencies, like the Treasurer's office, were staffed by supervisors without clerical help. Firefighters and police officers handled routine telephone calls to City Hall offices. The city's municipal garages stayed open as coin boxes replaced attendants to accept parkers' fees. More than 50 members of the police force, 30 of the 58 firefighters and nearly all nonuniformed workers walked off the job Thursday after the city entered the new year without a new municipal budget. Budget Proposal at Issue Mayor Herbert Pfuhl said today that he expected no change in the situation until at least next week, when he said he would probably veto the City Council's proposal for a $7.7 million municipal budget. Mr. Pfuhl, citing a budget shortage, has proposed a $6.7 million budget that includes a reduction in all municipal departments. Under his plan, the police force would be cut to 29 officers from 56 officers and the Fire Department would be cut to 28 firefighters from 58. Mr. McCracken has said that local banks would refuse to grant the city loans in anticipation of tax revenue if the Council's budget was adopted. Members of Flood City Lodge 86 of the Fraternal Order of Police, which represents police officers, and Local 630 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which represents nonuniform workers, walked off the job Thursday. Firefighters who would remain under the Mayor's budget continued to work, but only in the downtown firehouse. Johnstown is best known for the 1889 flood that killed more than 2,200 people. The city of about 35,000 people has suffered economically in recent years, mostly through cutbacks at a Bethlehem Steel Corporation mill.
