505|1987\01\03|U.S.C. Names Coach|Larry Smith, hired yesterday as Southern California's football coach, said he hopes to return the Trojans to national prominence. ''When you come in here, you see the sky as the limit,'' Smith said on the U.S.C. campus. ''I'm a very goal-oriented person and we'll shoot for the stars.'' Smith, who turned struggling programs into winners at Arizona and Tulane, inherits a team that was 7-5 under Ted Tollner this season, including a 16-7 loss to Auburn in the Florida Citrus Bowl.|Larry Smith, hired yesterday as Southern California's football coach, said he hopes to return the Trojans to national prominence. ''When you come in here, you see the sky as the limit,'' Smith said on the U.S.C. campus. ''I'm a very goal-oriented person and we'll shoot for the stars.'' Smith, who turned struggling programs into winners at Arizona and Tulane, inherits a team that was 7-5 under Ted Tollner this season, including a 16-7 loss to Auburn in the Florida Citrus Bowl. Larry Smith, hired yesterday as Southern California's football coach, said he hopes to return the Trojans to national prominence. ''When you come in here, you see the sky as the limit,'' Smith said on the U.S.C. campus. ''I'm a very goal-oriented person and we'll shoot for the stars.'' Smith, who turned struggling programs into winners at Arizona and Tulane, inherits a team that was 7-5 under Ted Tollner this season, including a 16-7 loss to Auburn in the Florida Citrus Bowl. Smith said he has no timetable, and that his top goal will be for the athletes to earn degrees. ''We're not going to come in here and make wholesale changes,'' Smith said. ''It's going to mostly be a matter of molding the players into a team, in the style I and my coaches are used to.'' Smith said he intends to bring eight of his assistants along with him, and one other assistant will be hired, or retained off Tollner's staff. Tollner, who had a 26-20-1 record at U.S.C., was dismissed following the end of the regular season, effective after the Citrus Bowl. The 47-year-old Smith agreed to a five-year contract that reportedly will pay him about $250,000 a year. SPORTS PEOPLE
