506|1987\01\03|STATE AIDE SEEKS VICTIMS' VERSION IN QUEENS CASE|The special state prosecutor for criminal justice in New York City appealed yesterday to lawyers for black victims of the Howard Beach attack to substantiate their charges that the police and the Queens District Attorney had mishandled the investigation.|The special state prosecutor for criminal justice in New York City appealed yesterday to lawyers for black victims of the Howard Beach attack to substantiate their charges that the police and the Queens District Attorney had mishandled the investigation. The special state prosecutor for criminal justice in New York City appealed yesterday to lawyers for black victims of the Howard Beach attack to substantiate their charges that the police and the Queens District Attorney had mishandled the investigation. Stepping into a case riddled with contradictions and stymied in court, the special prosecutor, Charles J. Hynes, publicly asked the lawyers to reach him over the weekend and provide evidence that the authorities were ignoring or covering up vital elements of inquiry. But the lawyers, Alton H. Maddox Jr. and C. Vernon Mason, promptly rebuffed the appeal and repeated their demands that Federal prosecutors or a special state prosecutor named by Governor Cuomo take over the prosecution of the case from the District Attorney, John J. Santucci. The impasse appeared to set the stage for a full-scale investigation next week by Mr. Hynes into charges by the lawyers that the authorities had mistreated their client, Cedric Sandiford, and had suppressed his account of the death of his 23-year-old stepson, Michael Griffith, who was killed by a car while fleeing an attack by white youths. Mr. Sandiford, 36, who has made no public statements on one of the worst racial incidents in the city in years, said he would attend a public forum at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem today and tell what happened in Howard Beach early on Dec. 20. As the complex case moved into its third week, there were these other developments: * Mayor Koch met at City Hall with black and white leaders of Queens and Howard Beach and expressed concern that the community's name was being equated with racism. ''We should not pillory a whole community,'' the Mayor declared. * An interracial group calling itself Concerned Citizens of South Queens denounced the attacks but defended Howard Beach as a fair-minded community and called on clerics to preach sermons and hold prayer vigils encouraging racial harmony. * A coalition of black groups called for a citywide ''day of mourning and outrage'' for the black victims on Jan. 21 and said they were considering plans for a black boycott of businesses and schools that day. * New York City school officials said security in the schools - including John Adams High School in Ozone Park, where three white youths accused in the attack are enrolled - was being reviewed to insure safety when classes resume Monday. * Judge Ernest Bianchi of Criminal Court in Queens, who dismissed murder, manslaughter and assault charges against the whites last Monday for insufficient evidence, defended his actions in a passionate courtroom statement during a hearing for three black youths accused of attacking a white teen-ager as they chanted slogans of revenge for Howard Beach. The judge upheld assault charges against two of the black youths and dismissed the charges against the third. Attack on 3 Blacks The Howard Beach case stems from an attack by a group of white youths on three blacks - Mr. Griffith, Mr. Sandiford and Timothy Grimes - early Dec. 20 as the blacks walked through the community just west of Kennedy International Airport after their car broke down. The whites beat them with fists, a baseball bat and a tree limb in an eight-block chase that ended at 1 A.M. at 156th Avenue and 86th Street, beside a chain-link fence of the Shore Parkway. Mr. Grimes had escaped earlier. The police said Mr. Sandiford told them that he and Mr. Griffith ran through a hole in the fence to escape and that he saw a dark car involved in the chase appear again on the parkway. They quoted him as having said he did not witness the fatal crash. Mr. Griffith was struck and killed by a car driven by Dominick Blum, a 24-year-old court officer, who left the scene, returned an hour later and was not charged after telling the police he thought he had hit a tire or an animal. The police later said their investigation showed that Mr. Blum was not part of the attack and that he had killed Mr. Griffith accidentally. Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason have contended that Mr. Sandiford saw the crash, that Mr. Blum was an accomplice of the white youths and that he deliberately killed Mr. Griffith. They have charged that the police and the prosecutor are covering up Mr. Sandiford's evidence and have said their client will not cooperate unless Mr. Blum is charged with murder and the case is turned over to an independent prosecutor. But the lawyers have not given detailed evidence to support their charges, and while the police have denied the allegations and cited details to support their accounts, numerous gaps, discrepancies and contradictions in the official version have left doubts among many about what happened. In an effort to determine if authorities mishandled the case, Mr. Hynes, whose title is Deputy Attorney General and Special Prosecutor for the New York City Criminal Justice System, appealed yesterday to the lawyers to provide him with evidence of their contentions. He said he would be willing to meet ''anywhere, anytime.'' ''Right now, we have nothing more than allegations,'' Mr. Hynes said. ''I haven't seen any evidence to support them. If by Monday I haven't heard from them, then I'll take the next step. I think these are very serious charges and there has to be some resolution.'' Mr. Hynes did not say what his next step would be, but legal experts said he would probably open a full-scale inquiry into the charges and into the handling of the case by the police and the prosecutor. The experts said Mr. Hynes would not supersede Mr. Santucci as prosecutor in the case. Mason Assails Hynes's Role By late yesterday, Mr. Hynes said he had not heard from the lawyers. But Mr. Mason, in an interview, criticized Mr. Hynes's intervention as inadequate and said Mr. Sandiford would not cooperate until either Federal prosecutors or a special prosecutor named by Governor Cuomo took over the case from Mr. Santucci. ''With all due respect to Mr. Hynes,'' Mr. Mason said, ''he is not the proper prosecutor to deal with this case. We want a comprehensive and thorough investigation on a state and Federal level and the appropriate thing for the Governor to do is appoint a special prosecutor.'' Mr. Mason said Assemblyman Roger L. Green, a Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the Black and Puerto Rican Legislative Caucus, and James Bell, president of the Coalition of Black Trade Unionists, had both asked Mr. Cuomo to name a special prosecutor. The lawyer said Mr. Sandiford would cooperate with Mr. Hynes if a special prosecutor were named to supersede Mr. Santucci. But he accused the Governor of maintaining a ''wall of silence'' and of showing an absence of ''moral leadership.'' He said Mr. Cuomo had not condemned the attack or visited the families of the victims. ''If he has national ambitions,'' Mr. Mason said, ''we don't intend to sit silently by and allow him to project himself to the nation that he is the Governor of all the people in this state. He is not.'' Cuomo Aide Denounces Maddox The Governor's press secretary, Martin Steadman, who denounced Mr. Maddox Thursday as having ''zero credibility,'' retorted that the charges against the Governor were ''totally untrue.'' He said Mr. Cuomo had repeatedly condemned the attack and had not visited the families because he was tied up with state business in Albany. Mr. Cuomo's Director of Criminal Justice, Lawrence T. Kurlander, who asked Mr. Hynes to look into the case, said the Governor did not intend to name a special prosecutor to supersede Mr. Santucci because ''we already have in place a special prosecutor designed to deal precisely with this kind of thing - a man whose reputation is one of honesty and integrity and who is fully capable of dealing with these matters. Possibility of Civil Rights Case After the dismissal of the most serious charges against the white youths -an action that left only reckless endangerment charges pending against Jon L. Lester, 17; Scott Kern, 17, and Jason Ladone, 16 - law-enforcement officials said Mr. Santucci faced a difficult decision on whether to take the case before a grand jury. Without the testimony of Mr. Sandiford - the only person besides the suspects and their friends who saw what happened - chances of a successful prosecution were doubtful, legal experts said. But some law-enforcement officials said that Mr. Santucci might turn the case over to Federal prosecutors as a civil-rights matter.
