509|1987\01\03|AGENT'S SLAYING POINTS UP RISE IN BORDER DRUGS|The killing of a narcotics agent in South Texas, the second such slaying in just over two months, is highlighting an unintended result of heightened efforts to enforce the drug laws in Florida.|The killing of a narcotics agent in South Texas, the second such slaying in just over two months, is highlighting an unintended result of heightened efforts to enforce the drug laws in Florida. The killing of a narcotics agent in South Texas, the second such slaying in just over two months, is highlighting an unintended result of heightened efforts to enforce the drug laws in Florida. Partly because of the stepped-up efforts in Florida, which began four years ago, the American border with Mexico, particularly in the long, empty stretches of South Texas, could be becoming the nation's hottest areas for drug trafficking, according to officials of the Drug Enforcement Administration here and in Washington. ''We know that some of the people who have used Florida as an entry point are moving their operations to Texas,'' said John Bott, supervisor of the drug agency's Houston-based sector, which includes the border area where William Ramos, a special agent with the agency, was shot to death Wednesday night. ''Arrests are up, and seizures, particularly cocaine, are up,'' said Mr. Bott. ''There's always been traffic through Texas, but now smugglers are changing their supply routes, and we're seeing more of it.'' Two Mexicans Are Arrested Mr. Ramos, a 30-year-old native of the Bronx who worked for the agency 18 months, was slain while trying to arrest a narcotics suspect three miles north of the Mexican border near Pharr, Tex. Two Mexican nationals living in South Texas were subsequently arrested. One, Felipe Molina-Uribe, 29 years old, who was shot in the leg in the attempted arrest, was charged with murdering a Federal agent. He and Benito Cavazos-Lamas, 25 years old, were charged with possession with intent to distribute 303 pounds of marijuana and conspiring to possess the drugs with the intent of distributing them. Mr. Ramos, a former assistant prosecutor in Mohave, Ariz., who held a law degree from the University of Arizona, was the second Rio Grande Valley narcotics officer to die in two months. Manuel Segovia of the Hidalgo County Sheriff's Department was shot to death Oct. 31 in a raid at a trailer home near the Rio Grande Valley town of Mercedes. Before that, the last drug agency agent to die on duty was Enrique Camarena Salazar, who was killed in February 1985 in Guadalajara, Mexico. Drug Labs in Mexico South Texas has always been a prime area for drug smuggling. But officials say they are seeing a major increase in drug traffic as more smugglers bypass the heavily patrolled South Florida area. In addition, drug agents say cocaine laboratories and other drug facilities are now becoming much more common in Mexico. Officials also say they are seeing more links between Colombian and Mexican drug smugglers, increasing the drug flow through Mexico. Officials in Florida make no claims of controlling the drug traffic there. But after drug arrests grew from 1,634 in 1982 to 6,620 in 1985, from 1,634 in 1982, and seizures of cocaine to 110,000 pounds in 1985, from 5,303 pounds in 1982, officials with the South Florida Task Force on drug enforcement say they expect final 1986 figures to show little or no growth. ''It's like a balloon - you squish in one side and it bulges out on the other,'' said Al Crespo, assistant to the staff coordinator for the South Florida project. ''But that doesn't mean were not seeing large quantities still coming our way.'' Increase in Arrests Border Patrol sectors in Texas say they have seen increasing drug traffic over the last year. Phil Jordan, special agent in charge of the Drug Enforcement Administration's office in Dallas, said arrests by his division, which handles a territory from the Rio Grande in West Texas to Oklahoma with fewer than 100 agents, grew to 856 in 1986 from 686 in 1985. He said cocaine arrests accounted for much of the rise. Mr. Jordan said the vast open land and porous nature of the border made the 2,000-mile-long border with Mexico particularly inviting for smugglers. And he said drugs were transported by car, truck and plane and concealed in a variety of ways. ''You have body mules, people carrying it across in body cavities,'' he said. ''You have mothers smuggling junk in the the diapers of babies.'' 'People Will Do Anything' Officials hope new agents expected this year and a recently begun effort to marshal diverse law-enforcement agencies in an alliance, as part of the Reagan Administration's war on drugs, will help provide a more effective anti-drug presence. The two recent shootings were unrelated, but Mr. Jordan said drug trafficking was becoming an increasingly violent world. ''I've been in law enforcement for 27 years,'' he said, ''and the violence within the last several years, in my estimation, is the worst I've seen in the way drug traffickers are arming themselves and killing others without hesitation, without regard for human life. ''You're talking about multimillion-dollar deals, drug trafficking empires that people will do anything to defend.''
