510|1987\01\03|WITH A GOVERNMENT ON HOLIDAY, CONFUSION FOLLOWS SAN JUAN DISASTER|Even in the best of times, the Puerto Rican government does not enjoy a reputation for efficiency.|Even in the best of times, the Puerto Rican government does not enjoy a reputation for efficiency. Even in the best of times, the Puerto Rican government does not enjoy a reputation for efficiency. When disaster strikes on a holiday, as it did on New Year's Eve at the Dupont Plaza Hotel, the opportunity for confusion multiplies. The response by firefighters and the police to the disaster has generally been given good marks, and several individual acts of heroism evidently saved lives and helped reduce casualties. Medical teams, acting on disaster plans, went from home directly to assigned hospitals to begin to treat the injured. Specialists and surgeons worked through the night to treat those with severe burns or bones broken by hotel guests jumping from lower levels of the burning hotel. But as each commercial airliner arriving in San Juan brought desperate relatives seeking word on the fate of the victims, the government here remained on holiday. Information became a premium commodity. Holiday Until Jan. 6 The Christmas season in Puerto Rico is a very festive and long holiday, extending through Three Kings Day, the Feast of the Epiphany, on Jan. 6. On Dec. 31, 1972, a cargo plane carrying relief supplies to the victims of an earthquake in Nicaragua took off from San Juan International Airport and crashed into the sea. On the plane was the baseball player Roberto Clemente, a hero of this island. But that disaster required no official response other than sorrow and memorials. The Dupont Plaza fire and its aftermath required a mobilizing of resources to care for the living and the dead. There was a pervasive feeling here over the past 48 hours that the government's response was slow, tentative and unfocused. Today, as well as New Year's Day, was an official day off for all of the government workers of the United States commonwealth, and most of the public life of San Juan was brought to a standstill except for the busy scene at the hotel, which remains cordoned off in the middle of the Condado Beach section. Efforts Appear Haphazard As a result, government efforts to deal with the disaster have appeared at times to be haphazard and uncoordinated. Those public officials who presented themselves to assist the press often had only pleasant smiles and numbers for telephones that were never answered. Heads of commonwealth agencies made themselves available for interviews in front of the television cameras but often could not help frantic relatives find hospitals where family members might be among the patients or provide basic facts to satisfy the media. . Wisps of Fact and Fiction Casualty lists never seemed to get compiled to provide up-to-date information from the several hospitals caring for the injured. No central clearinghouse for information was created, forcing relatives of the victims and journalists alike to chase after elusive wisps of fact that often dissolved into fiction. The situation was painful for the relatives making searches of hospitals and, as a last recourse, the morgue. Relatives and friends sat dazed, waiting in a large room at Rio Piedras Medical Center where the dead were taken for the slow process of identifying those whose features no longer existed. Catherine Pagan was bitter. ''No one has been able to help me,'' she said today after making the rounds in two days of nine hospitals and the morgue. Her husband, Victor, a 30-year-old superviser at the hotel casino, was among those listed as missing in the fire. Her bitterness shielded her fear of learning what she dreaded. But no counselors, no official agency - indeed, no one was there to tell her to return home and wait for a summons to the morgue while they intervened in her behalf. At the Dupont Plaza, the press for the most part milled around the perimeter of the hotel, standing on the asphalt on Ashford Avenue, hoping to spring on any official-looking visitor to the site to pry fact or conjecture to support the latest rumor. Interviews on the Spot An impromptu interview that begins one on one, in English or in Spanish, soon attracts attention as more reporters pick up the thread of content. If it seems promising, like a pigeon feasting on bread crumbs, the dispenser of information inherits a thick ring of attention. The television crews trot out with camera and lights, asking for everything to be repeated, in both English and then Spanish. The seat of all official information is reputed to be the office of Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon. Over the holidays the caller is referred to two telephone numbers for the police and other official ''task force'' information. These numbers are invariably busy. When a caller gets through after several tries and asks the official at the other end of the line for the latest count of the dead in the fire, the official dryly responds: ''I am not authorized to give the number of the dead. To get the number of the dead you must call the Director of Tourism.'' The official supplies a telephone number. No one answers.
