512|1987\01\03|FROM MAN, A HOME FOR WILDLIFE|During the fall migration, sandpipers came to feed in the new mud flats. Earlier, mallards and black ducks nested on small knolls.|During the fall migration, sandpipers came to feed in the new mud flats. Earlier, mallards and black ducks nested on small knolls. During the fall migration, sandpipers came to feed in the new mud flats. Earlier, mallards and black ducks nested on small knolls. The birds were attracted to a new 63-acre salt marsh, designed by man and gouged out by power shovel and grader on a desolate tract here between the New Jersey Turnpike and the Hackensack River. Before this wildlife oasis was created, the land was covered with 15-foot-tall marsh reeds called Phragmites. Now, it is open and washed by the tidal waters of the Hackensack and a tributary, Mill Creek, and is fast becoming a busy wading and feeding sanctuary amid the commercial development of the Hackensack Meadowlands. Required for Development One of the busiest builders in the Meadowlands, Hartz Mountain Industries, has spent about $5 million creating the marsh since late 1984 and planning to expand it to 30 acres across the turnpike, according to a spokesman, Martin Gold. Hartz Mountain's investment was required by the Army Corps of Engineers in exchange for permits to fill in other wetlands for construction of the Plaza at the Meadow, a development of offices, theaters and stores about a mile south of the marsh. ''I'm incredibly impressed with how well this environmental mitigation has worked,'' said Dr. Mark Kraus, a natural resources specialist with the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission, a state agency that oversees zoning and building in the Meadowlands. ''I was skeptical at first. But it's surpassed any of my expectations.'' Dr. Kraus called the new marsh the Meadowlands' first large-scale, privately financed attempt to make a tract there more accessible and hospitable to wildlife. An Open-Land Zoning Law Over the last dozen years, several portions of the 32-square-mile Meadowlands District have undergone major housing and commercial development. Perhaps the most notable is the Meadowlands Sports Complex, which includes Giants Stadium, the Meadowlands Racetrack, and the Brendan T. Byrne Meadowlands Arena. The complex is about two miles west of the new marsh. Zoning laws in the Meadowlands require developers to keep 50 percent of their land free of structures. But until the recent Hartz Mountain project, Dr. Kraus said, builders had not been required to undertake a major reshaping of wetlands to make them more appealing to wildlife. Much of the impetus for this comes from tougher enforcement of wetlands regulations in the Federal Clean Water Act by the Army Corps of Engineers, according to Michael Bontje, a biologist for the Manhattan-based environmental science and engineering company of Tippetts, Abbetts, McCarthy & Stratton, which is building the marsh. Generally, Mr. Bontje said, the Corps now requires that for each acre of wetlands developed, another acre must be environmentally enhanced. When work on the new marsh began two years ago, a herbicide was applied to kill the dense reed grass growing in terrain that was moist but rarely widely covered by water. Then, he said, 11 acres of channels were dug two feet below sea level. The average elevation of 45 other acres was lowered by one foot. The channels now draw in tidal waters from the Hackensack River and Mill Creek and disperse them over the 45 acres, creating pools at high tide and mud flats at low tide. Earth from the excavations was piled next to the flats to create the knolls that serve as nesting sites. ''Before, maybe only 5 to 10 percent of the habitat was usable by wildlife, and then only at low tide,'' Mr. Bontje said. ''Now, we've got habitat available around the clock, for wading, feeding, and resting throughout the tidal cycle.'' The entire site was planted with Spartina, a chord grass common in salt marshes. It grows to about 4 feet and far less densely than the Phragmites, thus allowing animals freer movement and wider range. Last summer, Dr. Kraus made his first formal study of the marsh's viability, examining colonization of worms, snails and other small crustaceans. In each square meter of marshland, he found an average of more than 5,000 of these creatures. On an adjacent site still covered with Phragmites, each square meter yielded an average of only 107. ''It's a safe assumption that this wouldn't be the case if the channels weren't dug,'' Dr. Kraus said.
