514|1987\01\03|NORTH'S RECORD: A WIDE ROLE IN A HOST OF SENSITIVE PROJECTS|Rarely has one man's silence stirred such curiosity or held such consequence as that of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North.|Rarely has one man's silence stirred such curiosity or held such consequence as that of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North. Rarely has one man's silence stirred such curiosity or held such consequence as that of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North. Since he was dismissed from the National Security Council staff by President Reagan on Nov. 25 for his purported role in diverting profits from the Iranian arms sales to Nicaraguan rebels, Colonel North has said virtually nothing about his role in the affair. In recent weeks, however, through interviews with more than 40 current and former top-ranking officials in the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon, a clearer picture of Colonel North's five-year career at the National Security Council has emerged. Colonel Declined Interview The extent of Colonel North's complicity in the events that led to the White House crisis and his dismissal has yet to be fully revealed. Neither Colonel North nor his attorney would be interviewed for this account. Colonel North, his colleagues said, was one of a small group of ideological, independent-minded aides from the Pentagon, the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department that formulated plans for secret programs in Central America, the Caribbean, Europe and the Middle East. Colonel North's power within the group grew with the number of years he spent with the Administration, and his influence was strengthened by turnover on the National Security Council staff and the deaths of several key Presidential and military aides. Although Colonel North never gained complete control of any single secret action, these sources said, he was able to alter decisions and helped to draw up plans for many of the Administration's most sensitive programs. Grenada, El Salvador, Lebanon White House and National Security Council sources said these were among the programs in which Colonel North played a vital role: * The invasion of Grenada in the fall of 1983. * Operations by the Central Intelligence Agency, starting in the spring of 1983, to supply Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras, with arms, munitions and other supplies. * The mining of three harbors in Nicaragua in early 1984. * The reduction in the activity of death squads in El Salvador, and the elections there in 1984. * Monitoring the hijacking to Beirut of a Trans World Airlines plane in the summer of 1985 and planning for the possibility that the United States would use military force to free 39 American hostages on the flight. * Planning and assisting in the interception of an Egyptian airliner carrying the hijackers of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro, and the diversion of the plane to Italy in the fall of 1985. * Assisting the Administration's program to sell arms to Iran in exchange for Iran's help in freeing American hostages held in Lebanon, beginning in the fall of 1985. * Assisting in plans to bomb Libya in the spring of 1986 after terrorist attacks in Europe that the Administration linked to the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. An Impulsive, Intelligent Officer Friends and colleagues say Colonel North was an impulsive, intelligent and tenaciously ambitious military officer at the height of his energies. He precisely fit the needs of a President who disdained the details of governing and whose closest advisers were neither experts in foreign affairs nor proficient in executing complex operations. These sources said Colonel North, 43 years old, was able to expedite plans for secret programs because he knew every office in the foreign affairs sectors of the Government whose officials had to be briefed, and he had personal relationships with their directors. Served Under Four Advisers Colonel North also served under four national security advisers in five years and found that the almost annual change in leadership and continual turnover in the staff was an advantage to him. Former and current members of the council's staff say he served as the institutional memory of the National Security Council, providing a continuity that made him almost indispensable. Colleagues also say Colonel North seemed to feel that embellishing his role could enhance his image and power. He often indicated to friends and colleagues, for instance, that he had a close personal relationship with Mr. Reagan when he did not, according to these associates. Most colleagues admired Colonel North's diligence, saying nobody worked longer hours at the White House and few had more creative ideas. ''Oliver North is a superb officer,'' said Gen. Paul F. Gorman, retired commander of the Southern Command, based in Panama, who worked with Colonel North on many Central American initiatives. ''He's the kind of guy I would want to have in any period of stress or danger. But it was necessary, from time to time, to rein him in.'' But Colonel North acquired enemies during his final two years at the White House because of a growing reputation for recklessness and for exaggerating his role in some programs. ''He would say things like, 'I just talked with the boss,' meaning Reagan, 'and the boss said such and such,' '' a former White House official who worked with Colonel North recalled. ''A couple of times I went up there to check whether Ollie had seen the President. And he hadn't, of course.'' A Temporary Assignment Colonel North was a highly regarded junior officer when he joined the staff of the National Security Council on Aug. 4, 1981, on a temporary assignment. His mission: to prepare briefing documents that would help the Administration complete an $8.5 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia that included five advanced Awacs radar planes. On Oct. 28, 1981, the Administration gained its first important foreign policy victory when the Senate approved the sale. The same month, the Marine Corps made Colonel North's temporary assignment at the National Security Council a standard three-year tour of duty. He became a member of the defense policies group and specialized in counterterrorism. In the summer of 1984 and again in 1985, Colonel North received extensions of his tour of duty after requests to the Marine Corps from Robert C. McFarlane, then the national security adviser. Among his first projects as a full-time staff member, colleagues say, was the modernization of the National Security Council's crisis management center. He worked with Dr. Richard Smith Beal, a systems analyst and Presidential special assistant. When the project was completed in early 1983 the center bristled with powerful computers, communications equipment to provide highly secret intelligence reports and elaborate wall-mounted electronic panels. Bit by bit, Colonel North moved into a position of prominence on the agency's staff. His work on the command center impressed William P. Clark, the No. 2 man at the State Department who moved over to become national security adviser in early January 1982, after Richard V. Allen resigned. Mr. Clark allowed Colonel North to act as the unofficial staff officer in charge of crisis management. Colonel North was privy to most of the intelligence reports and sensitive message traffic coming into the crisis center, and he routed messages to officials throughout the National Security Council and the White House, according to former staff members of the agency. Colonel North's role as a crisis manager expanded after Dr. Beal became ill. Dr. Beal, who was 38 years old, died on Nov. 2, 1984, after complications from open heart surgery. Colonel North also found an admirer in Mr. McFarlane, who arrived with Mr. Clark from the State Department to become the deputy national security adviser. On Oct. 17, 1983, Mr. McFarlane was promoted by President Reagan to the top job. Mr. McFarlane, who had graduated from the Naval Academy in 1959, nine years before Colonel North, and was a lieutenant colonel before he retired from the Marine Corps, understood the younger man's ambition and embraced his ideas, former council staff members say. Under Mr. Clark and Mr. McFarlane, Colonel North was allowed to set his own agenda. Through the latter half of 1982 and early 1983, he traveled frequently to Central America to work with American military advisers. In the spring of 1983, Colonel North joined a group formed by Faith Ryan Whittlesey, head of the White House Office of Public Liaison, and began delivering weekly briefings on Central America at the Executive Office Building for leaders of conservative public policy groups concerned about the Administration's program in the region. He became known in and out of the Government as one of the most influential White House experts on political and military conflicts in Latin America, primarily because his message seemed authentic. The 'I Was There' Factor ''He had the I.W.T. factor - I was there,'' said F. Andy Messing Jr., executive director of the National Defense Council Foundation in Alexandria, Va., and a former Green Beret who became close to Colonel North. The briefings introduced Colonel North to conservative political activists, who invited him to speak to conservative groups across the country. The members of these groups turned to Colonel North to help them gain access to White House officials and the President. Colonel North turned to them for contacts and money. From late 1984 until he was dismissed, according to political group leaders, Colonel North went to wealthy conservatives for contributions to finance a private supply operation for the contras. Probably the most important step in Colonel North's career, according to former staff members, occurred in the spring of 1983 when he was appointed to a secret Central America policy group that met regularly at the State Department. The group, called the Restricted Interagency Group, was formed in 1981 by Thomas O. Enders, then Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. Along with Mr. Enders, the group's members included Duane Clarridge, a Central Intelligence Agency official and expert on covert operations; Vice Adm. Arthur S. Moreau Jr., a representative from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Nestor Sanchez, a representative from the office of the Secretary of Defense. Colonel North substituted for a number of National Security Council officials starting in the late winter of 1983. In May, Mr. Enders was removed from his State Department post and replaced by Langhorne A. Motley. Colonel North became a permanent member of the interagency group in June 1983, when he rose to deputy director of political-military affairs on the National Security Council staff. Mining Nicaraguan Harbors The change in the committee assignment coincided with a string of events in Central America and the Caribbean in which, according to former and current White House officials, Colonel North was a very active participant. Among the programs the group considered was a plan to mine Nicaraguan harbors with percussion bombs in order to hinder shipments of arms and civilian supplies to Nicaragua. During the winter of 1983, according to Mr. Enders, the proposal was brought to the group by Mr. Clarridge of the C.I.A. The idea was rejected, Mr. Enders said. In June, the mining proposal was made again, and approved, a Washington source said. Colonel North and Mr. Clarridge, along with staff members of the C.I.A., National Security Council and the military, planned the operation, the source said. When it became public in April 1984, it caused a furor in Congress. ''It was the first time that Colonel North's name came across our desks,'' said a former member of the Senate Intelligence Committee. ''If you consider how that operation was run, the arrogance of it, and compare it to the Iran-contra affair, there are similarities.'' Invading Grenada In mid-October 1983, the interagency group began to play a crucial role in plans to invade Grenada. ''The group didn't plan the military maneuver; the Joint Chiefs did that,'' the Washington source said. ''But the group offered the invasion option, and planned for it. Ollie North was one of the four or five people below the cabinet rank who could be said to live with Grenada from before people could spell it to when the students kissed the ground in Charleston.'' The source was referring to a group of American medical students in Grenada whom the Reagan Administration said it had acted to evacuate. Before the invasion Colonel North had been working with State Department aides to develop strategies for eliminating death squad activity and holding free elections in El Salvador. After the invasion, Colonel North returned to that task. In the fall of 1983, death squads in El Salvador were committing an average of 800 killings a month and the President's ability to secure funds from Congress for the Salvadoran Government was being damaged. Again, though he did not direct the effort, Colonel North became one of a team of key advisers in a program. The team agreed that as part of the Government's effort, a top United States official had to visit El Salvador. The State Department, in a proposal written by Mr. Motley, asked Vice President Bush, and, according to former members of the Vice President's staff, Mr. Bush agreed. Before Mr. Bush embarked, Colonel North briefed him at length at least once in the White House, a former White House assistant said. Colonel North also went to San Salvador with Mr. Bush on Air Force Two and briefed him again before they landed. One of Colonel North's ideas, to use the F.B.I. to conduct surveillance on death squad leaders in El Salvador and to teach the Salvadorans to conduct their own investigations, was particularly successful, according to National Security Council sources and former officials of the American Embassy in El Salvador. Death squad activity has dropped to almost nothing since. The other crucial program in Central America that occupied Colonel North was helping the Nicaraguan rebels. It was, Colonel North knew, a program vigorously supported by President Reagan, according to former National Security Council staff members. Colonel North and Mr. Clarridge of the C.I.A., according to the Washington source, worked together on plans to supply Nicaraguan rebels with ammunition, weapons and food. The supply missions, operated by the C.I.A., were flown from the Ilopango air force base in San Salvador starting in the late spring of 1983 and continued until the fall of 1984, when Congress voted to stop aid for the contras. It was during these operations that Colonel North, according to White House sources, began to work independently on Central America and the Middle East. In the spring of 1984, his name was first linked in published reports to potentially illegal Government activity in a New York Times article about Government-sponsored supply missions to Nicaragua and Honduras. ''At a time when Congress wasn't forthcoming to the contras, Ollie was their strongest link in Washington,'' said Mr. Messing of the National Defense Council Foundation. Colonel North's role in the Iran-contra affair started on Nov. 22 or 23, 1985, according to Congressional testimony by Mr. McFarlane. It was on one of those days that Mr. McFarlane asked Colonel North to help move a shipment of arms to Teheran that had been held up in Israel. Colonel North asked the C.I.A. to help, according to Congressional testimony by William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence. Colonel North, according to Mr. Casey, told the C.I.A. that the plane in Israel was loaded with oil drilling equipment. The plane was actually filled with antitank missiles. By late 1985, it would have been second nature for Mr. McFarlane to seek Colonel North's assistance. In mid-June that year, Colonel North had been dispatched to the Middle East by Mr. McFarlane to monitor the hijacking of a T.W.A. jet in which 39 Americans had been taken hostage. A White House official said Colonel North was working closely with the Delta Force, a counterterrorist military unit. Capturing Hijackers Then, in October, Colonel North offered a suggestion to Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, then the deputy national security adviser, for capturing the hijackers of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro. Colonel North said the United States could intercept the four men over the Mediterranean while they were being flown from Egypt to Tunis and divert the plane to Italy. Admiral Poindexter and Admiral Moreau of the Joint Chiefs of Staff helped the military plan and perform the mission, according to State Department officials. Colonel North coordinated the intelligence, diplomatic and military activity from the crisis management center. Colonel North also accompanied Mr. McFarlane on trips to Teheran last May, six months after Mr. McFarlane resigned as national security adviser, and again last October. Little else is known about the extent of Colonel North's involvement in the Iran-contra affair. One of the few messages Colonel North was unable to intercept was his own letter of dismissal. Nobody was more surprised thatn Colonel North, said a National Security Council staff member, when Presient Reagan made the announcement. Colonel North had not been previously notified. Later that evening, President Reagan called Colonel North to wish him well and thank him for his service.
