515|1987\01\03|BEHIND CHINA'S PROTESTS|The increasing harshness of official criticism of the Chinese student demonstrations for greater democracy has raised questions about who in the nation's leadership is behind the rising tide of virulence in the state-controlled press. Today, the Communist|The increasing harshness of official criticism of the Chinese student demonstrations for greater democracy has raised questions about who in the nation's leadership is behind the rising tide of virulence in the state-controlled press. Today, the Communist The increasing harshness of official criticism of the Chinese student demonstrations for greater democracy has raised questions about who in the nation's leadership is behind the rising tide of virulence in the state-controlled press. Today, the Communist Party and the Government continued their criticism of the protesters after New Year's demonstrations Thursday that swelled into the largest public protest seen in Beijing since the Democracy Wall period in 1979, when China briefly experienced free expression. The prominent press attacks by some party leaders who have resisted China's economic changes suggest the possibility of a politically tenser period building up to the 13th Communist Party Congress, scheduled in October. The congress is a key meeting at which Chinese leaders can be chosen and policies set. The Prominent Critics In all the denunciations of the students, the only members of China's Communist Party leadership who have been identified are those who are generally regarded as resisting, to a greater or lesser degree, the sweep of economic changes pushed by Deng Xiaoping, the country's senior leader. Indeed, many of the leaders quoted in recent days are usually never quoted in the press except on minor occasions such as meetings with foreign dignitaries. Suddenly it is the party hard-liners who are prominently mentioned in Chinese news accounts describing the reaction to the protests. On Sunday, a special group of party leaders, all identified with that wing of the party, used the occasion of a tea party for a well-known storyteller to characterize student calls for democratic freedoms in China as an unhealthy attempt to impose ''all-out Westernization'' on the country and to destroy Communism. Although repeating their view that the students' supposed embrace of the West is politically corrupt, these party leaders have also vigorously championed the virtues of the Communist Party, the legitimacy of its dictatorship and the role it must play in the life of the country. 'Great, Glorious and Correct' ''The Chinese Communist Party is a great, glorious and politically correct party that has always retained its revolutionary vigor,'' Wang Zhen, a member of the Politburo and a central figure among the hard-liners, said in remarks quoted by People's Daily, the official party paper, ''The leadership of the Communist Party is not granted by heaven,'' Mr. Wang said, ''but by countless revolutionary martyrs who, wave after wave, shed blood and sacrificed themselves for half a century.'' Mr. Wang's remarks bear tinges of the political exhortations more typical of the hysterical climate of the Cultural Revolution than the sober-minded pragmatism that has been characteristic of public statements by party leaders in the last year. Because of the extremely closed nature of decision making, it is virtually impossible to be sure of the implications of the press campaign and its protagonists. Some Western diplomats argue that a growing rift between the hard-liners in the party and the economic pragmatists led by Mr. Deng is suggested in repeated press attacks on the students by Mr. Wang and by such ideological colleagues as Hu Qiaomu, a member of the Central Committee and the director of the office that is compiling the works of Mao; Peng Zhen, a member of the Politburo, and Chen Yun, a member of the standing committee of the Politburo. An Unassailable Terrain By using the press to attack the students, these diplomats contend, they are carving out an unassailable terrain of ideological legitimacy from which they can begin to slow economic initiatives pushed by Mr. Deng. At the same time, the hard-liners may be able to use this occasion to scuttle any move toward political liberalization, a goal that has been frequently discussed in the press in the last six months. Although the shape of any such changes is vague, it is widely thought that a main goal of political changes would be to separate the party from the Government and finally to place the party under the rule of law and the constitution. Currently, the party is essentially a law unto itself. For the hard-liners, changes of this sort are tantamount to an attack on the party itself. Today, People's Daily again denounced any attempts to question the leadership of the party and charged that ''over the past few years, some people in ideological and cultural fields used chances for reform to express all kinds of deviant thinking.'' Between now and the time of the party congress, the hard-liners may be able to employ their cloak of political righteousness to rally allies to their cause, stiffen party control over universities and public life and try to hem in Mr. Deng and his associates, according to some diplomats. An Avenue for Deng On the other hand, Mr. Deng may see the hard-liners as an avenue to pursue his own ends. By no means a democrat, Mr. Deng has stressed the importance of national stability if his plans for economic growth are to succeed. Indeed, in 1979, while at first appearing to tolerate a brief explosion of free expression, Mr. Deng crushed the spreading movement when it began to question the primacy of the party. By giving the hard-liners in the party free rein for once, Mr. Deng may paradoxically be seeking to strengthen the party so that he can continue the economic shake-up in a less politically charged atmosphere. In this sense, Mr. Deng is able to remain aloof from the issue of democracy itself and while at the same time avoiding being pulled into the messiness of suppressing the student movement. What seems clear is that despite the high rhetorical pitch of the hard-liners, the police and university officials have retained an almost casual posture toward the student demonstrations. It is not impossible, some Western diplomats here contend, that this reflects a degree of protection, or even sanction, from some quarters in the party.
