517|1987\01\03|BATTLE AGAINST DRUNKEN DRIVING SHOULD SHIFT FOCUS, SOME EXPERTS ASSERT|As the police stop tens of thousands of motorists around the country for sobriety checks over the extended New Year's holiday, some experts are arguing that the fight against drunken driving would be more effective if it focused on offenders as alcoholics, not as social drinkers who went a little too far.|As the police stop tens of thousands of motorists around the country for sobriety checks over the extended New Year's holiday, some experts are arguing that the fight against drunken driving would be more effective if it focused on offenders as alcoholics, not as social drinkers who went a little too far. As the police stop tens of thousands of motorists around the country for sobriety checks over the extended New Year's holiday, some experts are arguing that the fight against drunken driving would be more effective if it focused on offenders as alcoholics, not as social drinkers who went a little too far. According to these experts, even with the stepped-up enforcement in the current crusade against drunken driving, the chance of getting picked up for being intoxicated is minuscule unless a motorist drives that way habitually. The police and other safety officials estimate that they pick up only 1 in 2,000 drunken drivers. Of those who are picked up, the majority show signs of alcohol dependence or alcoholism if they are clinically evaluated, according to several studies. If this is true, the finding would cast doubt on the efficacy of most programs designed for first offenders, which are geared to social drinkers, not alcoholics or others with problem drinking. Programs for those convicted of driving under the influence or drunken driving stress relatively brief classroom instruction on the problems with drinking and driving, perhaps combined with mandatory community service work. Education Programs Popular More than 25 percent of all drivers in fatal crashes are drunk at the time of the accident, according to statistics of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The number of traffic fatalities in which one driver or pedestrian was legally drunk has fallen, but it is still very high, according to the agency, which counted 20,360 in 1982 as against 17,870 in 1985. The response to drunken driving around the nation has varied from raising the drinking age to banning discount drinks at bar ''happy hours,'' but has centered on programs that force first offenders into education programs that stress that alcohol and driving do not mix. The problem, according to some experts, is that those who are caught are not really first offenders. ''We're wasting our time in America on three-quarters of the hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people we arrest,'' said Judge Albert L. Kramer, of the Quincy District Court in Massachusetts, who has made a specialty of the field, in a telephone interview. Quincy District Court sent 1,252 people convicted of drunken driving from 1982 to 1985 to a two-day clinical assessment and found that 1,031, or 82 percent, were alcoholics or ''problem drinkers'' and only 221, or 18 percent, were social drinkers. Citing Massachusetts probation studies, Judge Kramer said that 44.8 percent of the ''first offenders'' in that state had prior criminal records for offenses likely to be alcohol-related, such as disorderly conduct, larceny and assault and battery. 'Threats to Safety' ''Drunk drivers are not mere social drinkers who happen to over-indulge,'' he wrote in a paper published recently in the Alcohol Treatment Quarterly. ''They are largely alcoholics, seriously addicted, and represent threats to the public safety.'' Studies in other states have also found a high proportion of alcoholism or problem drinking among those stopped for drunken driving. Alcoholism is indicated immediately in many of those stopped, according to Judge Kramer and others, because of the very high blood alcohol levels measured. While the legal limit in most states is .10 percent, the average for those arrested is from .18 to .20, according to Alfred Crancer Jr., a program manager in the San Francisco regional office of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. He put the proportion of those arrested who have a ''moderate to serious'' drinking problem at 90 percent. To have .20 alcohol content in the blood, a 160-pound person would have to consumer 11 drinks of 80-proof liquor over a one-hour period on an empty stomach, Mr. Crancer said in a paper, ''The Myth of the Social Drinker-D.U.I. Driver,'' presented last April at the American Medical Society on Alcoholism and Other Drug Dependencies and the Research Society on Alcoholism. To reach .10, the 160-pound person would have to consume six drinks the same way. Six drinks in an hour is far in excess of typical consumption, according to a variety of studies. At the National Council on Alcoholism, the oldest voluntary agency in the field, Christine B. Lubinski, a spokesman, said that at that level of drinking, ''The only people who wouldn't be unconscious, vomiting in the bathroom or looking for a car blearily, are alcoholics.'' Experts also agree that the kind of education program that might convince social drinkers to be more careful would not affect the behavior of alcoholics. At St. Mary's Rehabilitation Center, a prominent alcoholism treatment facility in Minneapolis, for example, Dr. George A. Mann, the medical director, asked what effect the typical first-offender program would have on the behavior of an alcoholic, responded, ''I would say, zero.'' ''If you want to look at a program that really gets to the bottom of the problem, you have to separate out the people who are there because they have abused alcohol on that occasion, and those who are diagnosable alcoholics,'' Dr. Mann said. He said that of those stopped for the first time for drunken driving, about 40 percent are probably alcoholics but an equally high proportion might be ''alcohol abusers'' or ''problem drinkers,'' or people who experience ''harmful or destructive consequences'' of drinking. Judge Kramer said: ''Alcoholism blurs any recognition of the harm they are doing or any fear of penalty.'' According to Mr. Crancer: ''These people know when they're sober that they should not drive drunk. There's not a drunk in the U.S. of A. who doesn't know it's illegal, immoral, unethical, stupid and expensive. But when they start drinking, if they have an alcohol problem, that goes out the window.'' Treatment of alcoholism can be more effective than simple license revocation, according to Judge Kramer and others, because lack of a license does not keep people from driving. It is also, they argue, a better use of the tremendous effort required of the police and judicial system to bring a driver in for sentencing. To catch a single intoxicated driver at a highway checkpoint, for example, the police may have to stop 150 cars. Some Experts Disagree Some experts said, however, that they could not agree that the bulk of the drunken driving problem is caused by a relatively small number of drinkers. ''These are people that have gone out and drank and are not well versed in their consumption level of alcohol,'' said Lieut. Richard McGee, commander of the traffic division of the Maryland State Police. ''Most of these people are one-time shots.'' For most of them, he said, one arrest is sufficient. ''When they get tagged the first time,'' he said, ''they say 'Hey, we're done with it.''' But Lieutenant McGee added that it might take months or years of drunken driving to be arrested. John A. Volpe, a former United States Secretary of Transportation who was later the chairman of a Presidential commission on drunken driving, said, ''I don't think you can actually say that well, he's a social drinker and just got carried away that night, or that he's habitual drunk, arrested two, three, five or a dozen times.'' Because of plea bargains for previous offenses, people stopped for drunken driving might have records that show only minor violations, so that when they are brought before judges, according to Mr. Volpe, ''It's like he's not appearing for the eighth time, but he's appearing as a first-time offender. So naturally the judge is more lenient.'' Proper sentencing is important, he said, but ''throwing a guy in jail, even on a first offense, truly a first offense, I don't think is a good idea.'' Other interested groups, such as Mothers Against Drunk Driving, do not list treatment as their top priority. 'Pay for That Crime' ''We at M.A.D.D. feel that if a person who drinks and drives, and is an alcoholic, you're looking at two different problems,'' said Norma Phillips, the president. ''This man or woman has broken the law, and needs to pay for that crime.'' Mrs. Phillips said that her group did not oppose providing rehabilitation to alcoholics who drive drunk, but she said, ''The swift and sure punishment of drunk driving will deter the crime.'' She said that of the more than 1.5 million arrests last year for drunken driving, about 30 percent were repeat offenders, and she asserted that better sentencing could reduce that number. From a different perspective, groups dealing with alcoholics also want immproved sentencing procedures. ''People in this field have known for years that D.U.I. is one of the best opportunities for intervention with an alcoholic that there is,'' said Ms. Lubinski. Many in the field believe that the solution to the problem is a further change in social attitudes toward drinking that can lead to drunken driving. Some favor expansion of the ''designated driver'' program, widely used in Scandinavia, in which one person in a group agrees not to drink. But that, too, would require a change in society's attitude toward drinking. According to George A. Hacker, director for Alcohol Policies of the Center for Science in the Public Interest in Washington: ''Being a designated driver is like being a pariah. You're the one sentenced to being the dull, staid character for the night. What a drag.'' He added, ''What we should really be doing is addressing how alcohol is perceived.''
