519|1987\01\03|STATE OFFICIAL RESIGNS AFTER OUTCRY OVER CITY MILK SALES RULING|The Cuomo administration announced today that its Agriculture Commissioner had resigned. It said his ruling three weeks ago not to allow more milk distributors to operate throughout New York City had drawn such an outcry that he could no longer serve as an effective advocate for Governor Cuomo's policies.|The Cuomo administration announced today that its Agriculture Commissioner had resigned. It said his ruling three weeks ago not to allow more milk distributors to operate throughout New York City had drawn such an outcry that he could no longer serve as an effective advocate for Governor Cuomo's policies. The Cuomo administration announced today that its Agriculture Commissioner had resigned. It said his ruling three weeks ago not to allow more milk distributors to operate throughout New York City had drawn such an outcry that he could no longer serve as an effective advocate for Governor Cuomo's policies. The formal announcement of the departure of the Commissioner, Joseph Gerace, was structured to make it appear as though he had left voluntarily and included the release of a two-page letter from the Governor, who wrote to Mr. Gerace that he accepted his resignation ''with considerable regret.'' But privately, Cuomo aides acknowledged that they had made clear to the Commissioner that it would be better for the administration if he resigned. Refusal to Grant Citywide License On Dec. 11, in a decision that was front-page news around the state, Mr. Gerace refused to grant a license to a New Jersey dairy to sell milk throughout New York City. Currently, only five dairies, all in New York State, hold such a license. Mr. Gerace said that granting the license to Farmland Dairy of Wallington, N.J., would have brought ''destructive competition.'' Farmland has won the right to distribute milk on Staten Island. Consumer groups were outraged, arguing that granting a citywide license to a sixth dairy would have led to healthy competition and lowered milk prices. They called on the Governor to remove the Commissioner, and their cause was picked up in editorials throughout the state. In a three-page letter to the Governor dated Dec. 31, Mr. Gerace referred to the ''torrent'' of commentary about his decision, adding, ''A new commissioner would be free to press aggressively for your program legislation without the obvious impairment of repeatedly defending decisions made under the existing statutory limitations.'' Mr. Cuomo, in a letter dated today that began ''Dear Joe,'' responded, ''It is unfortunate, but I can understand your assessment that the current situation may have precluded your ability to present our common position as effectively as possible in the months ahead.'' Mr. Gerace, a 59-year-old lawyer and former Chautauqua County Executive who has been Agriculture Commissioner since May 1983, will assume a post in the administration as director of the recently created Office of Rural Affairs. His nomination to the post, the salary of which has yet to be set, requires State Senate confirmation. New Post to Aid Rural Areas The office was created to protect the interests of rural areas, directing them to aid programs and encouraging economic development. Mr. Gerace said in an interview that the new job was ''a dream come true'' and that, as the resident of a rural area, he hoped to be a ''voice'' for rural interests. On Dec. 12, a day after the dairy ruling, the Governor was asked at a news conference if he would dismiss the Commissioner. ''He's still here, isn't he?'' Mr. Cuomo said. A 'Quasi-Judicial' Decision The Governor said at the time that he would have preferred a ruling opening up competition among milk distributors in New York City. But he said that the decision was a ''quasi-judicial'' one and that he assumed Mr. Gerace had weighed testimony and evidence and had based his ruling on the requirements of the law regulating the milk industry. Since then, however, pressure for hisouster has mounted. Last week, at a news conference at City Hall in New York, Daniel Oliver, the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, said Mr. Gerace had won his ''national consumer fleece award'' for the ruling, which Mr. Oliver said upheld ''an anti-consumer monopoly.'' Current state law forbids the granting by the Agriculture Commissioner of a license that would lead to ''destructive competition,'' but it does not define the term. Over the last two years, Mr. Cuomo has proposed changes in the law that would liberally define the term and allow more milk distributors into the city. But they have been blocked by upstate Republicans whose constituents include farmers who sell to the five dairies that sell in all five boroughs of the New York City market. Administration officials said the Governor had not decided on a replacement for Mr. Gerace in the $79,218-a-year post, formally called Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets. The executive director of the state Consumer Protection Board, Richard M. Kessel, said he would like the new Commissioner to press for changes in the law. But he said that in the meantime, he would like him to rehear the Farmland case and grant it the license. Mr. Kessel has argued that the license could be granted under the existing statute and that Mr. Gerace was too strict in his interpretation of it. It was not clear, however, if that would happen. Administration officials said tonight that they were inclined to ask the new Commissioner to concentrate on lobbying for the Governor's proposed changes in the law and to let the Farmland decision stand for now, if only to increase pressure on the Legislature to enact the changes. The Commissioner said he wanted to concentrate on looking ahead. He referred, however, to ''the drum beat of media commentary'' about his decision not to grant the citywide license and added that milk distributors were making far less profit than was generally believed and that news organizations had ''failed to find out what the facts really are.'' New York State's milk-licensing procedures have been under investigation since November by the State Investigation Commission, which has called Mr. Gerace as a witness.
