520|1987\01\03|NEWS SUMMARY SATURDAY, JANUARY 3, 1987|International|International International 2-4, 24 A clearer picture of Oliver L. North, gained from interviews with more than 40 current and former top officials, shows he was a powerful, ambitious aide who helped plan secret programs in many regions. Page 1 Bolivia's cocaine business is back, just six weeks after the departure of American troops who were helping to curb cocaine traffic. The drug trade appears to be operating with greater vigor than ever. 1 Cardinal O'Connor toured a museum devoted to the Holocaust, Yad Vashem, in Jerusalem. He later suggested that the grim pictorial record had not changed his views on Vatican recognition of Israel. 3 The French rail strike continued as workers rejected Government proposals to end it. Some political analysts said the unions were striving to embarrass Prime Minister Jacques Chirac. 3 Pretoria reported violence, saying three blacks were burned to death in Soweto and a white soldier was shot and wounded by black radicals near Johannesburg. 24 News analysis: China's criticism of the student demonstrations for democracy has raised questions about who in the nation's leadership is behind the increasing virulence in the state-controlled press. 2 Prince Sihanouk's son has returned to Cambodia and leads a growing guerrilla army. The son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, is becoming in some Cambodian eyes an heir to the powerful role of his father. 4 The U.S. is ending duty-free access on more than $3 billion in imports from Taiwan, South Korea and six other economically advanced developing countries, the Reagan Administration announced. 29 Chad reports battle gains 24 National 5-9, 16 Inquiries about possible arson in San Juan continued as investigators searched the rubble of the 22-story luxury hotel Dupont Plaza, which burned Dec. 31, killing more than 95 people. 1 Safety in Puerto Rican hotels was the subject of questions raised by the New Year's Eve fire. A tourism official said the blaze was an isolated case and should not deter tourists from visiting the island. 6 Puerto Rico's response to the disaster on New Year's Eve has at times appeared haphazard and uncoordinated. Much of the Commonwealth's government was shut down for long holiday, adding to communication problems. 6 Predictions of Government deficits came from the Congressional Budget Office, which said that under current law, the deficit would be $174.5 billion this year and $169.2 billion next year. 1 A northeaster over New England combined with tides raised unusually high by a rare celestial configuration sent people scurrying inland after it left six people dead along the southeastern coast. 1 Positions of the Sun, Moon and Earth created the high tides causing trouble along the East Coast. Had the six factors at work been in complete coincidence, it could have been a disaster, specialists said. 7 The drunken driving crusade's focus should be on offenders as alcoholics, not as social drinkers who went a little too far, some experts argue. The police estimate they pick up only 1 in 2,000 drunk drivers. 5 Mr. Reagan said 1987 would be better than 1986 as he returned to Washington from California to confront what aides concede to be the most strained and difficult period of his Presidency. 16 Drugs cross the Mexico-U.S. border with increasing frequency, say law-enforcement officials, who call the trafficking a worrisome result of stepped-up enforcement in Florida. 5 Lafayette, Ind., is learning Japanese, preparing for a new automobile plant that will be built by two Japanese manufacturers. Job-seekers have come from afar, though the plant will not open for years. 5 A fiscal crisis in Johnstown, Pa., has prompted the police, fire and public works unions to walk off the job. State police officers patrolled the streets yesterday. 9 A deaf man who spent 41 days in jail on an open-ended sentence was not represented by a lawyer when he was sentenced, a public defender says. The man was released two days after he was discovered in jail. 16 Wall Street had a rousing debut for the new year, with a market rally as powerful as any last month. The Dow Jones industrial average broke out of its slump by rising 31.36 points, to 1,927.31. 29 $6.2 million paid for reef damage 5 Woman hopes to sway Soviet 7 Washington mayor sworn in 15 Washington Talk 9 U.S.R.A.: Bureaucratic caboose Regional 25-27 An appeal to lawyers for the victims of the Howard Beach attack came from a special state prosecutor, who asked them to prove over the weekend that the authorities were covering up elements of the inquiry. 1 A 52-year-old comedian was stabbed in the chest as he performed before 1,200 people at a Manhattan theater. Chiang Kuang-Chao, a popular comedian in Taiwan, was in fair condition yesterday. 1 A resignation over a milk dispute was announced by the Cuomo administration, which cited the public outcry over a recent ruling on milk distribution made by the official, Agriculture Commissioner Joseph Gerace. 25 A man-made salt marsh in Jersey spans 63 acres and attracts a variety of wildlife. It is fast becoming a busy wading and feeding sanctuary amid the commercial development of the Hackensack Meadowlands. 25 Man in the News: Peter L. Zimroth, who Mayor Koch formally named to be the new Corporation Counsel - the city's chief lawyer - has 14 years of experience as a prosecutor and law professor and has practiced privately. 27 Amato tries to stop bonuses 8 Suffolk to seek spending cuts 25 Koch declines bet on Jersey's teams 25 Queens group seeks harmony 26 Charges against 2 upheld 26 Racial incidents reported 27 Neediest Cases 8
