521|1987\01\03|BRUINS POUND DEVILS|The Devils have several problems to solve, but the one that needs imminent solution is the first period. The Devils followed their recent habit of allowing too many goals in the opening period again tonight, spotting the Boston Bruins a 5-0 lead en route to a 7-2 loss at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.|The Devils have several problems to solve, but the one that needs imminent solution is the first period. The Devils followed their recent habit of allowing too many goals in the opening period again tonight, spotting the Boston Bruins a 5-0 lead en route to a 7-2 loss at Byrne Meadowlands Arena. The Devils have several problems to solve, but the one that needs imminent solution is the first period. The Devils followed their recent habit of allowing too many goals in the opening period again tonight, spotting the Boston Bruins a 5-0 lead en route to a 7-2 loss at Byrne Meadowlands Arena. ''We're looking for answers to the problem we have in the first period,'' said Coach Doug Carpenter, who held a 20-minute meeting with his players after the game. ''We spoke about our situation, and the biggest question I have is why get behind in the first period.'' Rick Middleton led the Bruins with two goals, with Lyndon Byers, Nevin Markwart, Reed Larson, Greg Johnston and Charlie Simmer getting a goal each to help Boston end a five-game losing streak. Chevrier Is Replaced The Bruins took 42 shots against Alain Chevrier, who allowed 5 goals on 21 shots in 24 minutes 53 seconds of action. Kirk McLean replaced him and allowed 2 goals on 21 shots. Andy Brickley and Mark Johnson scored for the Devils, who are without a victory in six games (0-5-1). The Devils took a total of 23 shots, but only 4 in the last period, against Bill Ranford. ''We realize we obviously have a problem in the first 20 minutes,'' said Kirk Muller of the Devils. ''We have to resolve the fact that we've been coming out flat.'' In two losses to the Rangers in the last two weeks, the Devils spotted them leads of 4-0 and 3-0 early in the game. They also allowed Washington a 3-0 lead on Dec. 19, but they rallied for 6-4 victory in that game. Tonight, they yielded four goals in the first period, with the first two coming 43 seconds apart, as Byers opened the scoring at 6:42 and Middleton getting his first goal of the night at 7:25. The goal by Byers appeared to go in off Steve Richmond, a Devils defenseman. Markwart's goal that gave the Bruins a 3-0 lead with 2:56 left in the period was well constructed on the right by Ray Bourque, who avoided a Devil or two on the right and passed diagonally to Markwart, who entered the slot from the left side and beat Chevrier from the goalie's right side. The Bruins then capitalized on their third manpower advantage of the night, when Middleton got the last goal of the period with six seconds left with a backhander to the short side from the bottom of the left circle. Lead Grows to 5-0 Larson's eighth of the season, which gave the visitors a 5-0 lead, also came on the power play, 4 minutes 53 seconds into the middle period, when he beat Chevrier between the legs from close range. It was the last play in the game for Chevrier. The Devils still did not appear to come out of their lethargy for another six minutes or so. They got their first goal at 11:43 of the second period, when Brickley's shot from the slot ricocheted off the right post and into the net. ''We talked about our problem in the first priod,'' Mel Bridgman, the captain of the Devils, said about the meeting after the game, ''and what each player individually is supposed to do.'' The Devils picked up the momentum after Brickley's fifth of the season and scored again at 15:03 of the period, when Johnson beat Ranford over the glove. They had two chances to come closer, but their momentum was lost when they had to kill a penalty with three minutes left in the period. The last period also turned dout to be a disaster for the Devils as they took only four shots on goal. The Bruins had 11 and got goals from Johnson and Simmer to secure their first victory in six games (1-5-0).
