523|1987\01\03|STORM AND TIDES RAKE EAST COAST, LEAVING 9 DEAD|A classic northeaster, combined with tides raised unusually high by a rare celestial configuration, sent New Englanders scurrying inland yesterday afternoon after the storm left nine people dead and caused at least $14 million in damage along the southeastern coast of the United States.|A classic northeaster, combined with tides raised unusually high by a rare celestial configuration, sent New Englanders scurrying inland yesterday afternoon after the storm left nine people dead and caused at least $14 million in damage along the southeastern coast of the United States. A classic northeaster, combined with tides raised unusually high by a rare celestial configuration, sent New Englanders scurrying inland yesterday afternoon after the storm left nine people dead and caused at least $14 million in damage along the southeastern coast of the United States. As it swept through the New York metropolitan area, the storm and tides swamped many major roads, washed away a house in the Hamptons and stranded passengers on the Staten Island ferry for an hour. City transportation workers had to install a special bridge to reach the ferry, which was riding high in the water, well above the terminal's gangway. Evacuation Is Counseled In New Hampshire and Maine, the National Weather Service urged seaside residents to ''complete all safety precautions and evacuate to higher ground inland as soon as possible,'' but the civil defense authorities said only a dozen did so briefly in each of those states. In New Hampshire, two shelters were opened, but no one occupied them. Fewer than 10 people left their homes but returned by 3 P.M. Maine was fortunate that high tides did not coincide with the peak of the storm, which was expected to dump from 10 to 14 inches of snow by this morning. Driving was reported as hazardous, and in southern Maine, where as much as nine inches of snow fell in the day, officials closed the Maine Turnpike to commercial traffic. The weather service called the storm ''the most vicious'' since a February 1978 blizzard paralyzed Boston with 27 inches of snow, caused 29 deaths, destroyed 339 houses and inflicted $300 million property damage. ''This is a classic northeaster, a real East Coast bomb,'' said Mel Goldstein, director of the Weather Center at Western Connecticut State University. In Scituate, Mass., Dick LaCross, who lives near the beach, said: ''I just tied up my boats and put the cat in the attic. There's not much more you can do.'' Many residents in Massachusetts coastal towns voluntarily evacuated their homes after receiving warnings from local officials and the police in the morning. The Scituate police said the tide was about 6 feet above normal high tide. Hundreds Trapped In Marshfield, Mass., the tides, whipped by winds of up to 60 miles an hour, broke through a sea wall at about noon and trapped hundreds of people. Rescuers used boats and trucks to reach some of the people, according to Daniel McGonagle, the civil defense director of Marshfield, a seaside suburb 35 miles southeast of Boston. Mr. McGonagle said people had scrambled onto the roofs of their homes, cars or businesses. There were no reports of deaths or injuries in the Boston area. In Minot, a seaside community 20 miles southeast of Boston, waves smashed over an eight-foot-high sea wall and flooded streets and houses. One resident told of being battered about by a large wave as he drove behind the sea wall. Through the windshield of the car, he watched as the water rolled along the top of the wall for 50 feet, came crashing down to pick up the car and spin it like a surfboard into a telephone pole. Whole Town Under Water In Hull, just south of Boston, water up to five feet deep cut off two peninsulas crowded with homes and left much of the town flooded. ''The whole town, all the low-lying areas, are under water,'' said Kay Berberick, a town official. ''A lot of people who were here this morning are taking the chance now to get out of town with their families,'' said Claudette Fitzsimmons, a Selectman in Hull. In Boston, the unusually high tide had workers at the Marriott Long Wharf Hotel, which overlooks the harbor, filling sandbags to block doors. Next door, on the wharf, the water reached the windows of the Chart House restaurant and cars in the restaurant's parking lot were swamped. Most offices in Boston were closed by noon, with the streets clear of the usual traffic jams. At the height of the storm, from noon to 1 P.M., 350 people were evacuated from coastal towns south of Boston, but by late evening most had returned to their homes, according to a spokesman for the Massachusetts Civil Defense Agency. The storm was blamed for the deaths of four people in traffic accidents in North Carolina, as well as two in Virginia, which was also hit by coastal flooding, heavy rain and up to 5 inches of snow in some western areas of that state. Two people were also killed in Vermont and one in Massachusetts in traffic accidents related to the storm. Factors in High Tides Tides along the Eastern Coast were two to three feet above normal because of a rare combination of factors involving alignment and proxmity of the Sun, Moon and Earth that has occurred only three times since 1912, the weather service said. Twice a month the Earth, Moon and Sun become aligned in what is known as syzygy. At full moon, the Moon is opposite from the Sun and at new moon it is toward the sun. What makes the current situation rare is that at the new moon Tuesday, both the Sun and Moon were relatively close to the Earth. Along South Carolina's Grand Strand, a 50-mile strip of resort towns, cottages and condominium developments on the state's northeastern edge, local officials estimated that damages were ''in the millions.'' In the Garden City area alone,the low-lying southern edge of the Grand Strand, damage to oceanfront property was estimated from $5 million to $8 million, according to the Horry County Emergency Preparedness Director, Tommy Harrison. A causeway to Garden City, much of which is separated from the mainland by a saltwater marsh, was completely under water at the high point of the tide, Mr. Harrison said. ''Everything was impassable,'' he said. At Long Beach, N.C., where surging waves damaged at least 50 homes, the loss was placed at about $6 million. Roads to Atlantic City Closed On the island gambling resort of Atlantic City, N.J., waves pushed into downtown neighborhoods at high tide. ''Every road into Atlantic City is closed,'' said Jim Masland, director of emergency management for the city. Just to the west, Egg Harbor Township authorities said about 50 people from three motels, a detoxification center and homes took shelter at a high school until the waters subsided. In New York, Sam Schwartz, a spokesman for the city Department of Transportation, said: ''We have tides at our ferry terminal at the Battery that we have not seen in almost 20 years. It was so high that we couldn't discharge passengers from the 10 A.M. ferry until 11 o'clock. And we had to use a portable gangway.'' Portable Gangway to Ferry Mr. Schwartz said that the bridge at the terminal usually can be raised or lowered to reach the ferry. ''We raised the bridge to its highest point and we lowered the ferry by using maximum ballast,'' he said. ''Even with that, we had more than a foot distance. Rather than risk an accident, we brought the ferry back out into the water until the portable gangway could be installed.'' Mr. Schwartz said that sections of many major roads in the city were flooded. ''The entire Belt Parkway system, which includes the Cross Island Parkway, had lots of flooding throuhgout the system,'' he said. ''The F.D.R. Drive, where it runs under Gracie Mansion, was flooded.'' Mr. Schwartz said the ''trench area'' of the Cross Bronx Expressway, where the road cuts below street-level near Tremont Avenue, also was inundated. Parkways Are Affected Other roads that were affected, he said, included sections of the Grand Central Parkway, the Interborough Parkway in the vicinity of Myrtle Avenue and the Long Island Expressway. Mr. Schwartz said that his office had received no reports of major accidents. The storm also flooded a section of the Long Island Rail Road, knocking out service on the Long Beach branch for several hours. Railroad officials said that power on the line had to be shut off at about 10 A.M. because of flooding near the Island Park Station. Partial service was restored at 2 P.M. and by 5 P.M. the railroad had the use of both tracks, but delays continued through the evening. While the line was closed, passengers were shuttled on buses between Long Beach and Valley Stream. Cliff Crowley, the meteorologist in charge of the National Weather Service office in New York City, said he had received a report that a summer house on Dune Road in Westhampton had been washed away, ''and a couple of foundations there were weakened.'' ''Every time there's a major storm,'' he added, ''that's a very vulnerable area.'' In the Rockaways, in Queens, he said, ''they had to evacuate 14 people because of the flooding.'' Storm Center Moving Mr. Crowley said that as of 4 P.M. yesterday, the center of the storm had moved off the coast of Maine and ''is moving northeastward away from us.'' He added: ''It looks like most of the snow in the metropolitan area fell over New Jersey and Westchester and Rockland County, about three to four inches. We had about a half an inch of snow over Long Island and in the city.'' Combined with the rain, he said, the city received between 1 and 1 1/2 inches of precipitation. Relief was expected today, Mr. Crowley said: ''It looks like much better weather for Saturday - variable cloudiness and highs in the upper 30's. And it looks like even better weather for Sunday, sunny, high 35 to 40. Asked how he thought the city had fared through the storm, Mr. Schwartz, the transportation department spokesman, said, ''It's the first time I can recall that we can blame the Sun and the Moon for gridlock.''
