525|1987\01\03|REAGAN BACK IN CAPITAL IN UPBEAT MOOD FOR 1987|President Reagan, predicting that the new year would be ''better than '86,'' returned to Washington from California today to confront an array of personal and political problems.|President Reagan, predicting that the new year would be ''better than '86,'' returned to Washington from California today to confront an array of personal and political problems. President Reagan, predicting that the new year would be ''better than '86,'' returned to Washington from California today to confront an array of personal and political problems. After a New Year's holiday in relative isolation near Palm Springs at the estate of Walter H. Annenberg, the publisher and former Ambassador to Britain, Mr. Reagan faces what aides concede is the most strained and difficult period of his Presidency. But Mr. Reagan seemed in an upbeat mood this morning as he boarded Air Force One at sun-drenched Palm Springs Airport, and a reporter shouted, ''What will 1987 be like?'' ''Great,'' said Nancy Reagan, the President's wife. ''Better than '86,'' Mr. Reagan said when the question was repeated. Reagan Faces Hospitalization Before returning to work at the Oval Office, Mr. Reagan faces hospitalization for prostate surgery as well as a colonoscopic examination 18 months after surgery for colon cancer. Mr. Reagan, 75 years old, will enter the Bethesda Naval Hospital on Sunday for the colonoscopic examination. On Monday, Mr. Reagan is scheduled to undergo a surgical procedure to relieve discomfort caused by an enlarged prostate gland. The President is expected to remain in the hospital until the middle of next week. In an interview tonight at halftime of the Fiesta Bowl, Mr. Reagan made light of his upcoming surgery. ''As to your good wishes,'' Mr. Reagan told the NBC announcer Bob Costas, ''really what I'm going in for is kind of a breeze. I've been there before, so don't waste any sympathy.'' In the meantime, the 100th Congress will be sworn in on Tuesday, the first time in Mr. Reagan's Presidency that he will face a Senate and House controlled by the Democrats. What dominates Mr. Reagan's Presidency, however, as he enters the final two years in the White House, remains the Iran arms scandal. Privately, White House officials express concern that the investigations of the clandestine diversion of millions of dollars to rebels fighting the Nicaraguan Government, from money gained by the sale of arms to Iran, will dominate White House attention and dimimish Mr. Reagan's efforts in the next two years, if not crippling them. Mr. Reagan is scheduled to outline his program in the State of the Union Message Jan. 27. The diversion of funds is being investigated by a special prosecutor as well as Congressional panels. Mr. Reagan has already appointed David M. Abshire, former Ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to a special job that handles all issues within the White House related to Iran. But aides to Mr. Reagan have said that it would be ''unrealistic'' to assume that the Abshire appointment would somehow blunt the attention paid to the Iran arms issue within the White House and enable Mr. Reagan to avoid the issue. Beyond this, White House officials are plainly concerned that the Iran issue is only one of several factors that leaves Mr. Reagan in a seriously weakened position and threatens the prospect for a productive legislative agenda. These factors include Mr. Reagan's fall in popularity, as reflected in public opinion polls, as well as Democratic control of Congress and what officials predict will be the inability of the White House to keep Republican legislators in line as candidates prepare for the 1986 elections. Mr. Reagan's new budget is expected to bring broad criticism on Capitol Hill. According to a report today in The New York Times report, Mr. Reagan will propose an overall budget of $1,024.3 billion for the fiscal year of 1988, with a deficit of $107.8 billion. The budget proposes $1.8 trillion in military spending over the next five years, but would reduce farm aid by more than half and limit the growth of numerous domestic programs over the same period. The overall military budget would increase by about $20 billion a year for each of the next five years. On the way back to Washington, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said that the new budget ''will be designed to continue the President's program of economic growth and to preserve our national security buildup.'' 'Push for Free Market' Mr. Speakes said that the new budget's military proposals were ''designed to encourage the Soviets to bargain seriously so we can be successful in arms reduction.'' On the domestic side, Mr. Speakes said the budget ''will propose an approach to farm programs that will push for a free market, encourage production, exporting and opening up new markets.'' He said the budget would seek to reduce ''heavy and ineffective expenditure on farm programs.'' Mr. Reagan also faces some potentially delicate problems. One is the uncertain condition of William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, who recently underwent surgery for a cancerous tumor on his brain. Mr. Speakes insisted that Mr. Reagan had no plans to replace Mr. Casey. The White House spokesman has also said that Mr. Reagan has no plans to replace his chief of staff, Donald T. Regan, because of the Iran arms issue. Mr. Regan spent the New Year in Florida.
