526|1987\01\03|ISSUE OF SAFETY OF HOTELS RAISING BROAD CONCERN|The question of the safety of guests in Puerto Rican hotels has emerged from the ashes of the New Year's Eve fire that killed more than 90 people here at the Dupont Plaza Hotel.|The question of the safety of guests in Puerto Rican hotels has emerged from the ashes of the New Year's Eve fire that killed more than 90 people here at the Dupont Plaza Hotel. The question of the safety of guests in Puerto Rican hotels has emerged from the ashes of the New Year's Eve fire that killed more than 90 people here at the Dupont Plaza Hotel. Officials of the Puerto Rican Hotel and Tourism Association said today that the fire was an isolated case and should not deter tourists from visiting the island. They said that until this week member hotels had an outstanding safety record and no one died in a hotel fire in recent memory. Clearly concerned that the fire would harm the tourism industry, the association officials said they doubted that additional safety features would save lives. The commonwealth does not require sprinkler systems in hotels, and the Dupont Plaza had sprinklers installed only in the basement kitchen, boiler room and main linen supply room, Bruce Shulman, director of the hotel, said today. Many hotels install sprinklers in locations considered vulnerable to the outbreak of fire, such as kitchens and storage rooms. Impact Too Early to Tell There was little evidence that the fire dealt the fragile Puerto Rican tourist economy a serious blow. But everyone seems to agree that it may be too early, in this holiday week, for a reaction to be accurately measured. ''So far, we have not experienced any cancellations,'' said Nicholas Michael, vice president of marketing and sales for GWV International, a New York wholesale travel concern. ''But today's a slow business day so I'm not too sure if it's a good time to judge. What happens next week remains to be seen.'' Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon, who says in the aftermath of the disaster Wednesday that he will have the government study fire safety measure revisions, added that the evidence indicated that the existence of a complete sprinkler system at the hotel would have had little impact on the death toll. Most of the victims died on lower levels of the 22-story structure as explosions sent a fireball and smoke through the casino, discotheque and lobby. Scores were trapped in the upper floor rooms by the smoke. Search for Signs of Arson Investigators are searching for signs of arson and any evidence that bombs were planted. They were also seeking links between the fire and the labor strife at the hotel as a strike deadline neared. ''The Dupont Plaza tragedy is an isolated case and has nothing to do with the other hotels that have no labor troubles,'' said Dieter Huckestein, Caribbean director of Hilton International, who is general manager of the Caribe Hilton in San Juan. ''I've worked in hotels in Cyprus and Israel and far worse trouble did not stop tourism,'' he observed. ''No one should have any trepidation in their minds about coming to Puerto Rico at this time.'' The Caribe Hilton, the island's largest hotel, with 640 rooms, recently installed a sprinkler system in its tower wing and plans to install sprinklers throughout the rest of the hotel, Mr. Huckestein said. San Juan, with a million inhabitants, has fewer major fires than does a mainland city of its size, officials reported. Homes and buildings do not require heating systems, fireplaces are virtually unknown, and the home heating appliances that represent potential fire hazards are not necessary. Construction in Puerto Rico Residential housing tends to be constructed with nonflammable building materials like concrete blocks. Most are one-story open structures in which escape from fire is easy, and there is less danger of suffocation by smoke. Hotels that followed similar low-level, open styles of architecture were also considered to be less of a threat from fire. High-rise modern structures such as the Dupont Plaza represent a different problem, officials pointed out. Once a fire spreads quickly in such a building and cuts off ground-level exits, guests trapped in the higher floors are placed at much greater peril. Nevertheless, the hotel had a feature that many similar structures do not have. All the outside rooms have small balconies. The trapped guests were able to survive for hours on these balconies. Had the balconies not been part of the design, there is no telling how many others might have perished as the choking smoke drifted up, fire workers pointed out. A new generation of office buildings have risen in the Hato Rey financial section of the city that are copies of the modern glass buildings without windows in most American cities. These buildings have caused concern because the national fire department that protects the island's 3.3 million residents is considered to have inadequate equipment and to be undertrained in fighting blazes in tall buildings. Managers of first-rate hotels cite self-imposed reviews of safety systems and procedures as the best defense against fires. Some conduct regular drills with fire department personnel. But there is a sense that government inspection of fire safety features of hotels and office buildings is often lax and that violations go unreported. By law, hotel casinos must have two exits. But, unlike New York City, there is no regulation that requires the doors to open outward. The rear door in the Dupont Plaza casino, where many of the fire victims were trapped, opened inward. That, investigators said, may have added to the toll as panicking victims crushed against the door in their flight from the smoke and fire.
