528|1987\01\03|Arizona State Impressive; Spectacular Finish for Oklahoma|''We tried hard, but were outquicked,'' Bo Schembechler said today, a day after his Michigan team squandered a 15-3 lead and was beaten by Arizona State, 22-15, in the 73d Rose Bowl. ''And we lost to a little better team.''|''We tried hard, but were outquicked,'' Bo Schembechler said today, a day after his Michigan team squandered a 15-3 lead and was beaten by Arizona State, 22-15, in the 73d Rose Bowl. ''And we lost to a little better team.'' ''We tried hard, but were outquicked,'' Bo Schembechler said today, a day after his Michigan team squandered a 15-3 lead and was beaten by Arizona State, 22-15, in the 73d Rose Bowl. ''And we lost to a little better team.'' Schembechler, the Wolverines' coach, who suffered his seventh loss in eight Rose Bowl games, said: ''You can toss Miami, Oklahoma and Arizona State in a hat and they're all about the same. They are good at football on both sides of the ball. Everyone knows how good Oklahoma is. Everyone underestimates Miami's defense, and Arizona State, well, you saw out there how they beat us.'' Schembechler, who did not mention Penn State in his observation but has always had a high regard for the Nittany Lions, made his assessment several hours before Penn State defeated Miami, 14-10, in the Fiesta Bowl for the national championship. He said it the morning after Oklahoma's thrashing of Arkansas, 42-8, in the Orange Bowl. Oklahoma Is Awesome Oklahoma finished its 11-1 season with a powerful performance on both defense and offense and an excellent effort by Dante Jones, the man who replaced Brian Bosworth at linebacker. Bosworth had been disqualified from the Orange Bowl game after testing positive for anabolic steroids. Bosworth, a fourth-year junior, had earned all-America honors and was considered by some as the nation's best linebacker. But the Sooners hardly missed him as Jones led the Sooners with nine tackles while Oklahoma stopped the Razorbacks' wishbone cold. Arkansas' only score came in the game's final 20 seconds. Speaking of how Jones did so well for Oklahoma, Schembechler said: ''See, there you are. That's how talented they are. They have the football players, and ask anybody who played them if they want to play Oklahoma again.'' The Sooners entered the Orange Bowl ranked No. 1 in the nation by The New York Times computer, but ranked third by both news-agency polls. They have lost only two games in the last two years, both to Miami. Nebraska Has No Trouble Nebraska, runner-up to Oklahoma in the Big Eight Conference, entered the Sugar Bowl with a slight chip on its shoulder and took it out on Louisiana State, 30-15. Coach Bill Arnsparger therefore went out a loser at L.S.U. He is leaving for the job as athletic director at the University of Florida. Another departing coach, Ted Tollner of Southern California, also went out a loser as the Trojans' offense was helpless against Auburn's defenses in the Florida Citrus Bowl. The Tigers of the Southeastern Conference won, 16-7. Tollner's dismissal was announced after his team lost to Notre Dame and U.C.L.A., but he was allowed to coach through the bowl game. A few hours before Michigan began losing its grip on a 12-point lead in the Rose Bowl, the other co-champion of the Big Ten Conference, Ohio State, whipped Texas A&M, 28-12, in the Cotton Bowl. The Buckeyes' defense did it as the Aggies' often superb quarterback, Kevin Murray, was intercepted five times. Chris Spielman, another of the year's all-America linebackers, made two of those interceptions and ran one of them back 24 yards for a touchdown. None of the five New Year's Day bowl games bore on the final No. 1 team ranking. But there were some excellent individual efforts. Jeff Van Raaphorst, the most valuable player at the Rose Bowl, threw two touchdown passes to Bruce Hill as he brought Arizona State back in the Sun Devils' first Rose Bowl appearance. Holieway Scores Twice Besides Jones's defensive performance for Oklahoma as a fill-in for Bosworth, Jamelle Holieway turned in a fine effort as Oklahoma's wishbone quarterback. Holieway scored two touchdowns and led his team on a rampage of 413 yards. Spencer Tillman ran for two touchdowns, including a 77-yard burst for the first touchdown. Brent Fullwood had 152 yards rushing and a touchdown in Auburn's victory over Southern California. But none of Thursday's winning teams could lay claim to No. 1, even though Holieway said after Oklahoma's lopsided victory, ''We have the best defense in the nation, and if we had played like we did tonight we'd have beaten Miami.''
