530|1987\01\03|ACTOR IS STABBED IN CHEST DURING TOWN HALL SHOW|As 1,200 theatergoers watched in horror, a man armed with a dagger rushed the stage of the Town Hall theater in Manhattan Thursday night, bowed before the star of a benefit variety show and then stabbed him in the chest.|As 1,200 theatergoers watched in horror, a man armed with a dagger rushed the stage of the Town Hall theater in Manhattan Thursday night, bowed before the star of a benefit variety show and then stabbed him in the chest. As 1,200 theatergoers watched in horror, a man armed with a dagger rushed the stage of the Town Hall theater in Manhattan Thursday night, bowed before the star of a benefit variety show and then stabbed him in the chest. The performer, Chiang Kuang-Chao, 52 years old, who was a popular comedian in Taiwan and Hong Kong before he moved to Monterrey Park, Calif., was in fair condition at St. Clare's Hospital last night. ''Mr. Chiang is the Chinese Bob Hope,'' said Mary Li, who was in the audience and witnessed the stabbing. Speculation on Motive The show was sponsored by the Asian-American Cultural Foundation, whose parent group, the Asian-American Republican National Federation, raises money for Republican political candidates. The police did not know of a motive for the attack, but members of the Chinese-American community said it might have stemmed from a dispute between rival Chinese-American businessmen. The police identified the attacker as Rene Cordova, 41, of 90 Lafayette Street in Manhattan, which is the McAuley Water Street Mission, a privately sponsored shelter. An employee of the shelter confirmed last night that Mr. Cordova had been staying there until his arrest. According to two witnesses and the police, the attack occurred about 10:30 P.M., near the end of a 2 1/2-hour show of songs and jokes in Chinese. As the full cast of 14 was about to sing the finale, ''Tomorrow Will Be Even Better,'' the attacker appeared from the left side of the theater and climbed the four steps to the stage, according to the witnesses, Mrs. Li and her husband, Yung Li, a columnist for The World Journal, a Chinese-language newspaper based in Flushing, Queens. ''We had no idea what he was trying to do,'' Mrs. Li said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''On the stage, he walked slowly, staggering slightly. He came up to the performers, bowed before Mr. Chiang, then all of sudden punched Mr. Chiang once with his right fist.'' Mr. and Mrs. Li said Mr. Chiang, dressed in a black tuxedo for the finale, reeled back from the blow, then fled backstage with the other performers. ''It was then we realized he wasn't punching Mr. Chiang but that he had a knife in his hand,'' said Mr. Li, who was sitting first row center in the balcony. Horrified stagehands and dozens of the theatergoers chased Mr. Cordova, seizing him in an alley adjacent to the theater, and holding him there until the police arrived. 'Really Bad Luck' Mr. Li, a long-time police reporter, said he interviewed Mr. Chiang backstage as he waited for an ambulance. ''I asked him, 'Did you know that guy?' '' Mr. Li said. ''He said, 'No, I don't know that guy. I don't know why he wanted to kill me. It's really bad luck.' '' Mr. Chiang suffered stab wounds to the diaphragm and liver, and underwent surgery early yesterday, according to a spokesman for St. Clare's Hospital, Linda Greenough. Mr. Cordova was charged with assault with a deadly weapon. He was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center, where doctors gave him a preliminary psychiatric evaluation. Mr. Cordova was to be arraigned last night at Manhattan Criminal Court at 100 Centre Street. The associate director of Town Hall, Phoebe Planick, said, ''Nothing like this has ever happened here.'' 'I've Never Heard of Him' The political federation that sponsored the show is headed by Ben John Chen, a real-estate developer in Chinatown. Spokesmen at the federation's offices at 221 Centre Street declined to comment on the incident yesterday. Republican and Conservative officials played down the significance of Mr. Chen's organization as a vehicle in party politics. ''I've never heard of him and I've never heard the Senator speak of him,'' said Mort Lawrence, the chief of staff to State Senator Roy M. Goodman, chairman of the Republican Party in New York County. ''I've never known his organization to state a position on an issue,'' said Howard Lim Jr., chairman of the Conservative Party in New York County. ''The organization allows Mr. Chen to print up letterhead stationery, business cards and run little fund-raisers for people.'' Rumors in Chinatown According to The World Journal, rumors circulated through Chinatown yesterday that the attack may have been a vendetta against Mr. Chen over a business deal that fell through. Repeated efforts to reach Mr. Chen for comment were unavailing. The cast members, who were from Taiwan and Hong Kong and had performed in Washington, Philadelphia and Boston before arriving in New York on Thursday, were sightseeing in Manhattan yesterday and were unavailable for comment. The house manager at Town Hall, Benjamin B. Stevens, described the scene as ''complete chaos.'' He said the attacker ran from the stage to an alley adjacent to the theater where members of the audience and stagehands subdued him. The World Journal published a 1,000-word article yesterday that recounted details of the attack. According to the newspaper, Mr. Cordova and another man, who was not identified, entered the theater near the end of the show. Mr. Cordova then approached the front of the theater, climbed the stairs and stabbed Mr. Chiang. Mr. and Mrs. Li said Mr. Cordova was wearing blue jeans, a blue denim jacket, a blue T-shirt with white stripes and black leather gloves. Cast members had noticed the two men in the audience, most of whom were from the Chinese community, but believed they were theater employees, the Chinese newspaper said. Ms. Planick said the Asian-American Republican National Federation had rented the hall for performances Thursday and last night. Last night's show was canceled and tickets were refunded. The federation also canceled future performances in San Francisco and Los Angeles. Tickets for the variety show, ''The Night of Dragon,'' cost $100, $50, $30 and $20 each, according to Mr. Stevens.
