531|1987\01\03|POLICE RECEIVE 20 COMPLAINTS IN BIAS INCIDENTS|In the two weeks since the Howard Beach attack, at least 20 other racially or ethnically motivated incidents, ranging from verbal slurs to beatings, have been reported to the Police Department, police officials said yesterday.|In the two weeks since the Howard Beach attack, at least 20 other racially or ethnically motivated incidents, ranging from verbal slurs to beatings, have been reported to the Police Department, police officials said yesterday. In the two weeks since the Howard Beach attack, at least 20 other racially or ethnically motivated incidents, ranging from verbal slurs to beatings, have been reported to the Police Department, police officials said yesterday. The officials said they could not determine whether the number of incidents had increased from the same period last year, as complete statistics were not yet available, although, they said, any such report was cause for concern. The officials also said, however, that it appeared likely that more incidents were being reported in part because of heightened public awareness and sensitivity to race relations. They stressed that it was impossible to know how many of the incidents could be traced directly to the attack in Howard Beach, Queens, early on Dec. 20 in which three blacks were beaten and chased by a gang of white youths. One of the blacks was fatally struck by a car as he fled his attackers. ''Whether some of the incidents would have occurred even without Howard Beach is very hard to say,'' said the commander of the department's Bias Incident Investigating Unit, Capt. Donald J. Bromberg. ''Even some of the incidents in which Howard Beach has been mentioned, it is possible that they might have occurred anyway and Howard Beach is the new war cry.'' Threats and Attacks Other police officials noted, for example, that after a bombing incident the authorities inevitably receive a flood of reports of suspicious briefcases and packages found on the street because the public's awareness of the potential danger is increased. ''Each bias incident that occurs in the city is taken very, very seriously by the department,'' Captain Bromberg said. ''To have an increase, even if it's a small increase, and particularly when you've had an incident that ends in such tragic circumstances as a person's death, you have a lot of people that are concerned, and rightly so.'' Citywide, since the Howard Beach case, the police have received reports of eight incidents of bias directed against blacks, six against whites, three against Hispanic people and three againts Jews, said a police spokesman, Sgt. Peter Sweeney. He said statistics for that period last year were unavailable. The incidents have included verbal taunts and anonymous telephoned threats, as well as physical attacks that caused minor injuries, the police said. The words ''Howard Beach'' were reported to have been mentioned in some cases, but not all, the officials said. Including the initial case, seven such incidents have been reported in Queens since Dec. 20, Captain Bromberg said. For the entire month of December, 11 bias incidents were reported in Queens, compared with 7 in December 1985, the captain said. For all of 1986, 61 incidents were reported in Queens, compared with 56 in 1985. Citywide totals for the month and year were to be reviewed by top police officials before being released. Among the cases the police have classified as bias incidents in recent days was one in which the transit police said a gang of more than 20 black youths, many chanting ''Howard Beach,'' beat up six riders on an A train early New Year's Day. But a Transit Authority spokesman, John Cunningham, said there were indications that the accused attackers, seven of whom were arrested, had come together ''primarily in a rampage and robbery spree.'' Captain Bromberg also said that was a possibility. ''We have to be very careful not to ignore a bias incident,'' he said. ''But you have to realize that crime often does cross racial lines and it's a matter of economics.''
