532|1987\01\03|DEATH TOLL AT 95 IN SAN JUAN BLAZE AS SEARCH GOES ON|The death toll in the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel reached 95 today as workers continued to bring bodies out of the 22-story luxury hotel. Correction: January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition|The death toll in the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel reached 95 today as workers continued to bring bodies out of the 22-story luxury hotel. The death toll in the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel reached 95 today as workers continued to bring bodies out of the 22-story luxury hotel. The latest count was announced by Hector Rivera Cruz, Puerto Rico's Secretary of Justice, who added that a few more victims might still be buried in the thick rubble and badly damaged rooms. Searchers said that finding and removing the corpses, many burned beyond recognition, was time-consuming, especially because the searchers hoped to preserve evidence that might be useful to investigators. #27 Positively Identified Because so many corpses were so severely burned, only 27 have so far been identified, according to Police Superintendent Carlos Lopez Feliciano. The body of the general manager of the Dupont Plaza, Brooke Thompson, was identified among the victims, as was Manuel Marrero, a United States Secret Service agent. Among those missing and now presumed dead were 17 hotel employees. Also reported dead was Margaret Ahrens, according to The Associated Press. She was a prominent performer of contemporary music in New York. The A.P. also said the dead included Jose Rivera Janer, president of the newspaper El Reportero. He was a close associate of Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon's in electoral campaigns and held high-ranking positions in the Governor's first administration, from 1972 to 1976. Two months ago he was named president of the struggling newspaper, which has close ties to the Popular Democratic Party. 'Good Possibility' of Arson Earlier today, Mr. Rivera Cruz said there was ''a good possibility that this incident will turn out to be arson,'' but he added, ''We have to finish our investigation before we can conclude that.'' Robert J. Creighton, the agent in charge of the New York office of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, whose jurisdiction includes Puerto Rico, said in an interview today, ''We are definitely approaching this as a criminal investigation.'' Mr. Creighton said the investigators were focusing on labor unrest at the hotel as a likely motive. Some survivors said they had heard reports before the fire that there would be trouble in the Dupont Plaza that was related to labor problems. Union leaders have denied any union role in the fire and have offered a reward for information on the causes. Asked about the possibility of a political motive involving Puerto Rican independence, he said, ''We are certainly looking into that.'' Management's Role Studied Mr. Rivera Cruz said the possibility of criminal negligence on the part of the hotel's management was also under investigation. The hotel management said it had complied with proper safety standards. Throughout the day, teams of investigators, civil defense workers and others labored in the tropical heat amid the noxious odors in and around the ravaged building. Paramedics vaccinated teams that had had contact with the dead. The area around the casino and restaurant, where most of the deaths occurred, was opened to the press for the first time this morning. The scene was a mixture of the macabre and the normal. Macabre Scenes Two floors were gutted. At the outdoor bar, the pina colada machine was scorched, but several bottles of liquor were still standing in a neat row nearby, their labels legible. There were bloody towels on the adjoining beach, but a few yards away at the pool, palm trees were undamaged, plastic chairs were unmarred and paperback books, magazines and bottles of suntan lotion were strewn about the patio. A sign read: ''No Lifeguard on Duty - Swim at Your Own Risk.'' Bodies of some victims were found in hotel rooms today, according to workers. ''They died from smoke inhalation,'' said Rita Aparicio, an emergency medicine technician. ''The smoke went through the air conditioning system.'' Denial on Locking of Doors Other aspects of the case remained unclear. For example, a number of survivors said that when the fire broke out, some of the casino's exit doors were locked or barred by security personnel. Bruce Shulman, the Dupont Plaza's director, said today that ''the doors were not locked - people did exit.'' Reports to the contrary, he added, ''are being investigated.'' Mr. Shulman said also that three small fires that broke out in the 10 days before the disaster were reported to the police and that threatening letters sent to hotel managers in recent days had been turned over to the authorities. In response, he said, the hotel had hired 30 extra guards. Mr. Lopez Feliciano, the Police Superintendent, said later that he did not know whether his department had received any letters from the hotel or whether any action had been taken in regard to them. Mr. Shulman said he could not comment on the content of the letters, but he added that none specifically mentioned New Year's Eve. A Warning Over Radio?  In light of the controversy over warnings, Mr. Shulman was asked about a union commercial that was broadcast by Noti Uno, an AM radio station. The ad, according to Victor Negron, a Noti Uno reporter, may have been aired dozens of times in December. It told listeners that negotiations were under way between the hotel management and representatives of the teamsters union, and that the Dupont Plaza was ''not the best place to be at year-end.'' Mr. Shulman said he had not been aware of the ad, which only ran in Spanish. Mr. Negron commented that others who had heard it, ''didn't think of it as a warning.'' In answer to other questions, Mr. Shulman said the hotel has failed no safety inspections and has complied with all safety regulations. Sprinkler systems, he said, are in use only in three locations: a hallway off the kitchen, a ninth floor linen closet and a utility room off the ballroom. Asked about reports that oxygen may have routinely been pumped into the casino to keep gamblers from feeling sleepy, he replied: ''I don't know. Oxygen is an extremely flammable substance.'' Oxygen-pumping is a practice in some mainland casinos. At other gatherings, on the streets and in the cafes of San Juan today, there was continued speculation over who might be to blame for the fire. At noon Governor Hernandez Colon held a memorial service for victims of the blaze in the garden of his official residence, La Fortaleza. Afterward, he said that if the fire was ''sabotage,'' he believed it was related to labor strife and had not been an act of political terrorism. Union spokesmen later said they refused to accept that assessment at this point. Baltasar Corrada del Rio, the president of the New Progressive Party, which advocates statehood for this Commonwealth, said one negotiator involved in the hotel's contract talks had been arrested in 1975 on charges related to racketeering and terrorism. He suggested that investigators should explore the possibility of links. That negotiator, Jorge Farinacci, acknowledged today that he had been arrested in connection with the $7 million robbery of a Wells Fargo depot in 1983 in West Hartford, Conn., and that he has been released on $1 million bail. He also said, however, that he had not been involved in the robbery and hoped to ''have a fair trial where I will establish my innocence.'' He called Mr. Corrada del Rio's statement ''an unjust and irresponsible insinuation.'' ---- Soprano Presumed Dead Miss Ahrens, a soprano who was reported among the dead in the San Juan fire, was a prominent performer of contemporary music in New York, and an occasional composer. Her ''Agnus Dei,'' for two sopranos and handbells, was described as ''a confection of monastic Minimalism'' by a Times critic when she performed it at Merkin Concert Hall in 1983. She also performed often at the League of Composers/International Society for Contemporary Music and the Prism Chamber Orchestra. In New York she was heard in the music of Pierre Boulez, George Rochberg, Jean Barraque and numerous younger composers, as well as a special concert of music to words by Gertrude Stein in 1983. She also sang earlier music, sometimes appearing with original-instrument ensembles in little-known Baroque music. Her last performance here was in Mr. Barraque's ''Au dela du Hasard'' at the Guggenheim Museum, in November 1986. Z Correction:  January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
