535|1987\01\03|KEY ANSWERS LACKING IN QUEENS RACIAL ATTACK|In the two weeks since a racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens, many questions have arisen about the incident, the victims, the assailants and the way law-enforcement officials have handled the case, which is widely considered to be the city's most serious racial incident in years.|In the two weeks since a racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens, many questions have arisen about the incident, the victims, the assailants and the way law-enforcement officials have handled the case, which is widely considered to be the city's most serious racial incident in years. In the two weeks since a racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens, many questions have arisen about the incident, the victims, the assailants and the way law-enforcement officials have handled the case, which is widely considered to be the city's most serious racial incident in years. According to the police, a 23-year-old black man from Brooklyn, Michael Griffith, died when he was struck by a car as he fled a gang of white teen-agers who had beaten him and two companions with a baseball bat and a tree limb. The accounts offered by the Queens District Attorney's office, by the Police Department and by lawyers and spokesmen for individuals involved in the incident have left a number of questions. Here is what is known, and not known, about the case so far: Q. Why is the man prosecutors describe as the key witness, Cedric Sandiford of Brooklyn, not cooperating with the investigators? A. The lawyer for Mr. Sandiford, the dead man's 36-year-old stepfather, advised him not to cooperate because he said the prosecutors were trying to make ''a case'' for the white defendants. The lawyer, Alton H. Maddox Jr., said Mr. Sandiford cooperated with prosecutors and detectives for three days after the attack, despite eye and head wounds he suffered in the attack. But Mr. Maddox said he advised his client not to view a lineup at the 106th Precinct on Dec. 22, or to testify at a preliminary hearing before Judge Ernest Bianchi in Queens Criminal Court on Dec. 29, unless charges were filed against the driver of the car that struck and killed Mr. Griffith. Mr. Maddox says the driver, 24-year-old Dominick Blum, a court officer who is white, was a willful participant in the attack. Q. Was Mr. Blum a willful participant in the attack? A. Investigators say they do not believe so. Q. Have the police questioned the people Mr. Blum says he was with? A. Yes. One of Mr. Blum's companions, Barry Melkin of Flushing, Queens, was given a polygraph test. He passed the test, law-enforcement officials said. Q. How serious are Mr. Sandiford's injuries? A. It is not clear. Mr. Maddox says Mr. Sandiford suffered head and eye injuries, but he was released from Jamaica Hospital hours after the attack. Thomas McCarthy, a spokesman for the District Attorney's office, says prosecutors discussed presenting Mr. Sandiford's medical records to Judge Bianchi in an effort to postpone the preliminary hearing until the witness was well enough to appear. But, according to Mr. McCarthy, Mr. Maddox did not turn over the records or a statement on Mr. Sandiford's condition. ''Maddox said you're not going to use that as a excuse for a continuance,'' Mr. McCarthy said. Q. Do the suspects still face any charges in the case? A. Yes. Judge Bianchi let stand a lesser charge, reckless endangerment, against the three, Jon L. Lester, 17, of Ozone Park, Queens; Scott Kern, 17, and Jason Ladone, 16, both of Howard Beach. Q. Why did John J. Santucci, the Queens District Attorney, take the unusual step of proceeding to a preliminary hearing instead of presenting the case directly to a grand jury? A. The district attorney and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward have said that officials preferred to air the evidence in such a sensitive case in a public forum rather than behind the closed doors of a grand jury room. Q. Did Mr. Santucci see any potential advantages in that course of action? A. Yes. Mr. Santucci's aides have said that a public hearing relieves the district attorney of criticism from those eager for a murder indictment or those preferring lesser charges, who can instead fault the judge. But in this case, some of the aides said, the strategy apparently backfired, because there has been an outcry anyway. Q. Was Mr. Santucci under time pressure to act? A. Yes. Law-enforcement officials cite a state law requiring persons held without bail on felony complaints to be released after five days unless a grand jury or a judge has established there is reasonable cause to continue their incarceration. That deadline came up last Monday, the day of the hearing. With Mr. Sandiford refusing to cooperate, the prosecutors decided that it was unrealistic to turn immediately to a grand jury. Q. Can the case continue without Mr. Sandiford? A. Yes, but it would be extremely difficult, legal experts say. He is apparently the only person known to prosecutors, other than the white assailants, who could have seen the final stages of the beating and Mr. Griffith's flight onto the parkway. Prosecutors could try to convince one or more of the teen-agers to testify against the others. Under state law, however, an acomplice's testimony must be corroborated by a nonparticipating witness or by physical evidence. And the police have no physical evidence to link the attackers to Mr. Griffith. Q. Other than Mr. Sandiford, did anyone see the attack and provide corroborating testimony? A. There are apparently witnesses to the first part of the attack, which occurred outside the New Park Pizzeria, on Cross Bay Boulevard at 157th Avenue. But in this early stage of the incident, only assault, not murder or manslaughter, is involved. Q. Was Mr. Sandiford the only witness to the attack's fatal conclusion? A. Possibly not. Law-enforcement sources say the police received a telephone call from a Howard Beach woman, apparently while the attack was going on. She reported that blacks were attacking a white. She called from a pay telephone, and detectives have been unable to find her. Q. Did Mr. Sandiford see the car hit Mr. Griffith? A. Apparently not. According to a spokesman for Mr. Santucci: ''At no time has Mr. Sandiford said he saw the accident either to us or to the police. He never told us that. He told us he heard a noise.'' Q. Why were no charges filed against seven other youths who were questioned as possible suspects in the beatings? A. The authorities decided not to charge them after Mr. Sandiford failed to go to the 106th Precinct on Dec. 22 to view a lineup. Q. Did the police strip-search Mr. Sandiford after they found him wandering, dazed, near the parkway? A. Mr. Maddox says yes. The police say no, although they acknowledge that he was frisked, a procedure they describe as routine under the circumstances. Q. Is there anything unusual about the way the police treated Mr. Blum? A. The police say that when Mr. Blum returned to the scene with his father, a police officer, they arrived in the father's undamaged Dodge Colt, not the Dodge Aspen he was driving when he hit Mr. Griffith. Mr. Blum told one police officer investigating the accident that he had been driving his own car, the Aspen, when he hit Mr. Griffith. But that officer failed to tell accident investigators, who assumed Mr. Blum had been driving his father's car, the undamaged Colt. As a result, the investigators decided that the Colt could not possibly have been involved in a fatal accident, and sent the Blums home. Q. When did the police realize a different car was involved? A. A few hours later, when they reviewed the accident reports. They immediately summoned Mr. Blum and told him to bring the Aspen. Q. Why did they not arrest Mr. Blum then? A. They said they did not believe an arrest was warranted because he had not denied involvement in an accident, had returned to the scene and was not considered likely to avoid the authorities. A grand jury could still indict him. Q. Why was Mr. Blum not tested for alcohol or drugs when he returned to the accident scene? A. Mr. Blum was not tested for intoxication, the police say, because there was no indication that his speech was impaired, and he appeared to be walking normally when he returned to the scene.
