536|1987\01\03|QUEENS GROUP SEEKS TO IMPROVE RACE RELATIONS|A coalition of blacks and whites from Howard Beach and other south Queens communities gathered yesterday to condemn the racial incident that resulted in the death of a black man.|A coalition of blacks and whites from Howard Beach and other south Queens communities gathered yesterday to condemn the racial incident that resulted in the death of a black man. A coalition of blacks and whites from Howard Beach and other south Queens communities gathered yesterday to condemn the racial incident that resulted in the death of a black man. The group said it would seek programs to improve race relations through the schools, churches and civic groups of south Queens, expressed faith in the criminal justice system, and called for an end to violence. ''A tragedy occurred in our community,'' said George Russo, co-chairman of the coalition of 35 blacks and whites from religious, civic, business, political, and educational groups in the area. ''We have begun a dialogue.'' The news conference took place in the gym at St. Helen's Church at 84th Street and 157th Avenue, several blocks from where Michael Griffith, a 23-year-old Brooklyn man, was killed by a car on the Shore Parkway after fleeing from a gang of white youths. 'Swift and Convincing Justice' ''The type of crime that was committed here a number of weeks ago has shocked the social conscience of the community and the entire city,'' Mr. Russo, who grew up in Howard Beach, said. ''The racial motivation of these actions has shaken the fabric that holds this ethnic and racially diverse city together. This type of conduct requires swift and convincing justice.'' Mr. Russo, a 32-year-old lawyer and president of District 27 Community School Board, was joined by the other co-chairman, the Rev. Irving Bryer Jr., 39, pastor of the Hollis Avenue Congregational Church in Queens Village, in making the statement. ''We cannot condemn all the members of this community for the acts of a few,'' Mr. Bryer said. ''There are many good people in this community. They're committed, they're honest people and they deplore the violence that has happened.'' He called on parents to urge their children to ''resist the temptation of continuing the violence'' when schools reopen Monday. The group will publish a newsletter for distribution in houses of worship and through civic groups in south Queens that will keep residents informed of human relations programs and events. The group will also ask the Board of Education to create or expand sports activities to bring young black and white students together and ask for funds for cultural programs. Mr. Russo said residents would be invited to a meeting to explore issues and an interfaith prayer vigil within the next two weeks. The grass-roots group had its first meeting in the Rockwood Park Jewish Center, adjacent to St. Helen's gym and school, several days after the attack, Mr. Russo said. A dozen Howard Beach residents who were not part of the coalition attended the news conference. Frank DeRicco, 50, owner of a lamp manufacturing company, said: ''Positive things were said here today. I see black and white people together come here to do something about the problem and they're not condemning the community.'' Thomas Malcolm, 52, a grants management specialist, said racism is a problem everywhere. ''We are dealing with attitudes,'' Mr. Malcolm, who is black, said. ''It's not enough to stick your head in the sand and say 'this will go away,' or 'it didn't involve my kids.' Each and every one of us have to say 'there but for the grace of God go I.' ''
