537|1987\01\03|CHARGES UPHELD AGAINST TWO IN ATTACK ON WHITE|A white teen-ager from Queens gave a harrowing account in court yesterday of how he was attacked by a gang of black youths yelling that they wanted to avenge an earlier attack on three black men in Howard Beach.|A white teen-ager from Queens gave a harrowing account in court yesterday of how he was attacked by a gang of black youths yelling that they wanted to avenge an earlier attack on three black men in Howard Beach. A white teen-ager from Queens gave a harrowing account in court yesterday of how he was attacked by a gang of black youths yelling that they wanted to avenge an earlier attack on three black men in Howard Beach. The victim, 17-year-old Jeffrey McCarthy, testified in Criminal Court in Queens at a hearing for three young men who are charged with assaulting him while he was walking to a bus stop three days after the Howard Beach incident. At the end of the four-hour hearing, Judge Ernest Bianchi ruled there was enough evidence to uphold charges of second-degree assault and aggravated harassment against Michael English, 20, of Jamaica, Queens, and Derrick Brown, 18, of South Jamaica, Queens. However, he dismissed charges against the third defendant, Richard Garces, 17, also of Jamaica, Queens, at the request of the prosecutor because a key witness had refused to testify. Judge Bianchi's ruling came four days after he dismissed charges of murder, manslaughter and assault against the three white defendants in the Howard Beach assault on three black men. The judge let stand charges of reckless endangerment. He said there was insufficient evidence to warrant the more serious charges because a key witness had refused to testify. Calling the defendants in court yesterday ''punks,'' the judge said: ''What you did was reprehensible. What did this fellow have to do with Howard Beach?'' Suspects Deny Charges All three men have denied participating in the attack, including Mr. English, who was arrested after having boasted on a television news show that he had participated. Mr. English later told the police that he had not taken part. Neither Mr. McCarthy nor other witnesses have been able to place him at the scene, according to yesterday's testimony. Mr. McCarthy did identify Mr. Brown in a lineup. Mr. McCarthy said he was heading for his Flushing home after visiting a Motor Vehicles Department office when he was attacked about 3:30 P.M. on Dec. 23 at Hillside Avenue and Merrick Boulevard in a heavily black area of Jamaica. One of his assailants - Mr. McCarthy said he did not know how many there were - yelled, ''Howard Beach! Howard Beach!'' the victim said. He said another yelled, ''He's a white boy and they killed a black boy in Howard Beach!'' This was a reference to Michael Griffith, who was killed by a car while fleeing white youths in Howard Beach. ''I kept walking,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''A black man approached me and hit me in the side of the face.'' Mr. McCarthy said he began running, but one of his attackers - whom he later identified as Mr. Brown - raced in front of him and kicked him in the right side. Mr. McCarthy said he was tackled and fell face down. ''I was getting kicked in the back of the head, which forced my face to hit the pavement several times,'' he said. ''I heard someone say, 'That's enough. Leave him alone,' and everyone ran away and I was left lying on the street.'' According to the police, the attackers dispersed when several white men ran to the victim's defense. Judge Bianchi allowed Mr. English to remain free on his own recognizance and reduced Mr. Brown's bail to $3,500, from $7,500. Mr. Brown did not immediatley post it and was returned to jail.
