538|1987\01\03|AS DOZIER GOES, SO GO LIONS|They are mirror images of their respective teams, Mike Irvin, Miami's sophomore wide receiver, flashy on the field and off, his black warm-ups accented by two gold chains, dark sunglasses and a studded earring; D. J. Dozier, Penn State's senior tailback, a face in a crowd in a conservative sports jacket, more than willing, he said, to place the needs of his team ahead of personal gain.|They are mirror images of their respective teams, Mike Irvin, Miami's sophomore wide receiver, flashy on the field and off, his black warm-ups accented by two gold chains, dark sunglasses and a studded earring; D. J. Dozier, Penn State's senior tailback, a face in a crowd in a conservative sports jacket, more than willing, he said, to place the needs of his team ahead of personal gain. They are mirror images of their respective teams, Mike Irvin, Miami's sophomore wide receiver, flashy on the field and off, his black warm-ups accented by two gold chains, dark sunglasses and a studded earring; D. J. Dozier, Penn State's senior tailback, a face in a crowd in a conservative sports jacket, more than willing, he said, to place the needs of his team ahead of personal gain. Before the game, Irvin and Dozier were seen as having something in common: both were barometers of the way their teams were playing. So if Irvin, a game breaker who already holds the Miami career record with 20 touchdown catches, could find openings in the Penn State secondary, then he and Vinny Testaverde, the Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback, could lead the Hurricanes to a one-sided victory in the Fiesta Bowl to determine the No. 1 team in the country. But if Dozier could keep the Miami defense on its heels with his ability to run inside and out, thus enabling Penn State to control the ball, the Nittany Lions' chances of winning would multiply. The strategy was to keep Testaverde on the sidelines as much as possible. As it turned out, Testaverde was on the field a lot - long enough to be intercepted five times in a 14-10 loss. 94 Yards, Winning Touchdown Dozier got his yardage - 94 on 18 carries, including the 6-yard run in the fourth quarter that put the Lions ahead to stay. For the fourth consecutive year, Dozier led Penn State in rushing, gaining 811 yards in the regular season, becoming the second leading runner in school history, behind Curt Warner. Still, Dozier could have been better had he not been slowed by injuries during his four years at Penn State, gaining 1,000 yards or more only as a freshman. He was healthy this season but Joe Paterno favored a balanced offense, passing more often and using five running backs to wear down opponents. ''The guy I felt bad for this year was D. J.,'' said John Shaffer, the Penn State quarterback. ''He could have been a Heisman Trophy candidate at another school, carrying 30 times a game. We felt, though, that we had a lot of people to run the ball.'' Dozier, who is from Virginia Beach, Va., said there are no regrets. ''I'm the type who does what he is asked and more,'' he said. ''You can't have a selfish attitude on this team, not with the other backs we have. My mother and father brought me up that way and that's the way Joe coaches. I love football, it's important to me, but it's not the only thing in my life.'' The 6-foot-1-inch, 204-pound Dozier came close to matching Warner's performance in the 1981 Fiesta Bowl, when Warner gained 145 yards to lead the Lions to a 26-10 victory over Southern Cal. Irvin Quick, Defense Quicker Irvin was one of the reasons the Hurricanes were clear-cut favorites. His speed and quickness typifies the Miami offense, but the Penn State defense was deceptively quick, largely shutting Irvin down. When he and Testaverde were redshirted in 1984, they spent a great deal of time practicing together, which carried over into the summer of '85. They have been a team ever since. ''I remember how jittery we both were before our first game last season,'' Irvin said. ''But Vinny showed confidence in me right from the start. He knows where I like to catch passes in certain situations, in my hands or my body. He'll give me hand signals at the line of scrimmage after reading a defense. In the huddle, when he tells me a play is going to be a touchdown, it usually is. We work well.'' Irvin was one of three talented Miami wide receivers, Brian Blades and Brett Perriman were the others, but Irvin was considered the best long threat. He figured Penn State would play a deep zone, giving him short gains over the middle. The Lions often used their all-America linebacker Shane Conlan, in man-to-man coverage in those situations. The thought of being covered by a linebacker made Irvin smile. He doesn't think there are any who can keep up with him. ''Penn State let's you nibble but not take the big bite,'' he said, more prophetic than he knew. Paterno compared Irvin to Lynn Swann, a compliment that briefly left Irvin speechless. ''My favorites have been Kellen Winslow and James Lofton,'' he said. He was miffed when he made only second team all-America, which he guessed can be attributed to the fact he is only a sophomore. Like his teammates, Irvin does not lack confidence. ''We want to put Penn State away early and celebrate the rest of the game,'' he said. ''We don't feel the pressure or get intimidated. You put the spotlight on us and we enjoy it.'' Tonight, Penn State enjoyed it even more.
