539|1987\01\03|PENN STATE INTERCEPTS MIAMI FOR NATIONAL TITLE|An aggressive and confusing Penn State defense consistently harassed, often outsmarted and yet just barely thwarted Vinny Testaverde, the Heisman Trophy winner, to win the national championship tonight.|An aggressive and confusing Penn State defense consistently harassed, often outsmarted and yet just barely thwarted Vinny Testaverde, the Heisman Trophy winner, to win the national championship tonight. An aggressive and confusing Penn State defense consistently harassed, often outsmarted and yet just barely thwarted Vinny Testaverde, the Heisman Trophy winner, to win the national championship tonight. Testaverde, the Miami quarterback from Elmont, L.I., threw five interceptions in an improbable 14-10 Penn State victory in the Fiesta Bowl that ended Miami's perfect season after 11 victories and gave the Nittany Lions (12-0) their second national title in five seasons. Soon after the fourth interception, which was Shane Conlan's second of the game, D. J. Dozier scored a 6-yard touchdown run with 8 minutes 13 seconds to play for the winning margin. The fifth interception, Pete Giftopoulos's second of the game on a fourth-down pass at the Penn State 1-yard line, ended a frantic drive with nine seconds to play. Despair Among Celebrants Testaverde, who completed 26 of 50 passes for 285 yards - but no touchdowns - was left alone, bent over in despair, as Penn State players and onrushing fans celebrated all around. ''We had a goal from the beginning of the year, and we fell short,'' he said. ''It's that simple. And it hurts a lot.'' Penn State was outgained, 445 yards to 162. John Shaffer, the Penn State fifth-year senior quarterback, completed just 5 of 16 passes for 53 yards, with one interception. But despite Penn State's success in avoiding the long gain and unnerving Testaverde, the Nittany Lions watched him lead a breathless drive in the final seconds. Testaverde completed a 32-yard pass in a fourth-and-six play from the Miami 27-yard line to give the Hurricanes their final chance. He completed the next five passes to carry the Hurricanes to the Penn State 6. On second down and goal, he was hit by Tim Johnson, a tackle, for a 7-yard loss to the 13. On third down, after a timeout, Testaverde threw to the right where a halfback, Warren Williams, dived and juggled the ball but failed to hold onto the pass. A Prayerful Paterno There were 18 seconds to someone's national championship. ''There's not much you can do,'' said Joe Paterno, the Penn State coach. ''I'm not the kind of guy that likes to pray for the Good Lord to take care of a football game. I figure He has better things to do. But I was tempted to pray.'' His defense accomplished more than prayer could. Testaverde dropped back and searched for Brett Perriman, a split end, who was curling in the left side of the end zone. Giftopoulos, one of the linebackers whose play disrupted the short pass routes all night, dropped into the coverage. ''Like he knew were I was going exactly,'' Testaverde said. Giftopoulos made the game-saving play that began the celebration. Just as the first Penn State champions limited Georgia's Herschel Walker, the 1982 Heisman Trophy winner, to win the Sugar Bowl four Januarys ago, the Nittany Lions challenged Testaverde to make big plays - and foiled his efforts when he tried - before an overflow crowd of 73,098 at Sun Devil Stadium. The Hurricanes took a 10-7 fourth-quarter lead on a 28-yard field goal by Mark Seelig, who had earlier missed a 28-yard attempt. But an equally brilliant Hurricane defensive effort was undone by a nightmarish collection of seven turnovers and nine penalties. Testaverde, who was intercepted just nine times all season, turned the high-powered Miami offense into a far more efficient unit this year. But Penn State challenged the Hurricane offense with a strategy that was as effective as it was expected. Disguised Zone Coverage The Lions tried to unnerve the Heisman Trophy winner with different types of blitzes. Rather than expose its defensive backs with one-on-one coverage when the blitzes were on, Penn State usually employed zone coverages, keeping three defenders deep to defend against the long pass. Underneath, the Lions often inserted an extra linebacker. In the line, the Lions shuttled in fresh players. The strategy risked the consistent completion of 10- to 20-yard passes by a fifth-year senior who has become as capable of dissecting defenses as any quarterback in the country. But in the second quarter, Testaverde started doing something that seemed uncharacteristic. The usually composed quarterback ignored some opportunities for safe - if shorter - gains in risky attempts to pick up more yardage. The first Miami turnover, a fumble by Mike Irvin, the sophomore receiver, at the Hurricane 44, came after a perfect Testaverde pass on third down that caught the speedy receiver in full stride. But Ray Isom, a Penn State safety, met Irvin squarely just after the pass arrived, Duffy Cobbs recovered and the Canes had been stopped abruptly. ''They were talking about how short our defensive backs were, and how slow they were,'' Conlan said. ''I said they haven't been hit by them. Those little guys rocked them. They didn't want to catch the ball.'' Miami's defense, meanwhile, was controlling the game from the game's first play from scrimmage. Shaffer, the maligned Penn State quarterback, was twice tackled for losses in his first series. But John Bruno, the senior punter, averaged 43.4 yards in 9 punts, and often forced the Hurricanes to begin deep in their own territory. At the start of the second quarter, with the game still scoreless, Miami's second turnover could be attributed more to greed. On a third-down play from the Miami 42, needing 9 yards for a first down, Testaverde had Brian Blades, his split end, open on the right side for more than enough first-down yardage. But Testaverde chose to go for the longer play, threw for the halfback, Melvin Bratton, and the pass was intercepted by Cobbs. Signs of Testiness For Testaverde, one uncharacteristic moment was followed by another. After Cobbs returned the interception to the Penn State 30 and the teams were headed back to the benches, Testaverde suddenly became involved in brief and uneventful shoving match. But the heated moment, immediately after his unusually poor choice, seemed to provide evidence that Penn State had at least temporarily succeeded in unnerving a Heisman Trophy winner. Shaffer, however, seemed more than unnerved; he appeared overwhelmed. He had lost just once in 66 games as a starting quarterback since his days as a seventh-grader in Cincinnati. But the one loss came when the lights had been brightest, a year and a night ago when Oklahoma intercepted three passes in Penn State's Orange Bowl loss. Tonight, on Penn State's second possession of the second quarter, Shaffer dropped back to pass on second down from the 32. With Brown, the defensive tackle, grabbing at Shaffer's feet, he began to move his right arm forward and appeared to suddenly decide not to pass. But the ball fell out of his hand and nearly straight down, where Bill Hawkins, a defensive end, caught it on the ground at the Penn State 23. The bizarre play was defined as a fumble by Shaffer, but Hawkins was credited with an interception because Shaffer went through a throwing motion and the ball never hit the ground. Regardless, the Hurricanes had their first break of an emotionally charged night. Soon, Bratton completed a brief drive with a diving 1-yard score that finally put the favored Hurricanes ahead. Penn State responded with its first sustained drive of the evening, a cautious, 74-yard trip downfield on the running of both Tim Manoa and Dozier and a series of short passes. Shaffer's 23-yard throw to a slanting Eric Hamilton put the Lions into Miami territory. Gains of 19 and 12 by Manoa helped bring the Lions to the 5. From the 4, Shaffer rolled to his right, looked for a receiver in the end zone, looked some more, faked a pass, and saw an opening. ''I was waiting for a receiver to get open, and they never did,'' Shaffer said. ''So I just turned on the 4.2 speed.'' He slid behind a block by the tight end Brian Siverling and dived into the end zone. The struggling quarterback picked himself up and punched his fist in the air on what was suddenly not such an overwhelming night. Until the end of that night, who would have guessed that Testaverde's season would end in frustration? ''Tomorrow will probably be a better day for everybody,'' a Heisman winner said tonight.
