546|1987\01\03|Heading for Trade War|Four days ago, President Reagan ordered 200 percent tariffs on a list of premium imports from Europe. The same day, Canada capitulated to United States pressure and agreed to tax lumber exports. Yesterday, Washington narrowed the duty-free preferences it grants to less-developed countries. And right in the middle of all this turmoil, the Commerce Department reported that the|Four days ago, President Reagan ordered 200 percent tariffs on a list of premium imports from Europe. The same day, Canada capitulated to United States pressure and agreed to tax lumber exports. Yesterday, Washington narrowed the duty-free preferences it grants to less-developed countries. And right in the middle of all this turmoil, the Commerce Department reported that the Four days ago, President Reagan ordered 200 percent tariffs on a list of premium imports from Europe. The same day, Canada capitulated to United States pressure and agreed to tax lumber exports. Yesterday, Washington narrowed the duty-free preferences it grants to less-developed countries. And right in the middle of all this turmoil, the Commerce Department reported that the November trade deficit was the country's biggest ever in a single month. It's been a bad week on the trade front, and things could easily get worse. The continued imbalance of imports and exports intensifies pressure on Congress for protectionist legislation. The Administration is trying to head it off with a show of toughness that comes perilously close to just the protectionism it says it wants to avoid. The immediate effect of these escalating hostilities will be higher prices for American consumers. The long-run danger, growing closer with each new move, is a trade war that will cripple everyone. America's confrontation with Europe dates back a year, when Spain joined the Common Market and had to adopt its blatantly protectionist tariffs on agricultural imports. That cost American farmers $400 million a year in grain exports, according to Washington's calculations. If Europe won't offset this loss by easing its barriers to other American products, the Administration proposes punitive tariffs on $400 million of European products sold to Americans, mainly British gin, French brandy, Dutch cheese, cheap wine from West Germany and olives from the Mediterranean countries. The first deadline for agreement, last summer, was extended to Dec. 31. Not satisfied with the concessions that Europe offers, the Administration has now set the 200 percent tariffs to take effect Jan. 31. If that happens, the Common Market has already announced countermeasures effective 15 days later. Both sides may be bluffing, but the fuse is lit.  Even assuming agreement, deeper issues promise more conflict. Farm subsidies on both sides of the Atlantic create huge surpluses that translate directly into curbs on farm imports. Another farm battle brews across the Pacific, over Japan's highly subsidized market for rice. All of the major countries' farm programs need to be rationalized; all of their farmers pack effective political punch. Nonfarm trade is just as contentious. In recent months, the Administration has cracked down on machine tools, Japanese computer chips and now Canada's softwood lumber. Chip restrictions have since been eased, but imports remain regulated. As for lumber, rather than let Washington tax imports with a tariff, Canada chose to tax them itself, adding at least $1,000 to the price of a new home. The only bright spots in this surge of new restrictions are things the Administration didn't do. It again put off punishing Brazil for its curbs on American computer equipment and it kept the new limits on duty-free imports to a minimum. Trade restrictions are growth restrictions. At a time when industrialized and developing countries alike need faster growth, the industrial powers are leading in the wrong direction. The only way to win at Trade War is not with more war but with Trade Peace.
