547|1987\01\03|The Cardinal's Correction|John Cardinal O'Connor of New York tried to do right, stumbled into wrong, apologized for his blunder and returns a wiser man from his visit to Jordan and Israel.|John Cardinal O'Connor of New York tried to do right, stumbled into wrong, apologized for his blunder and returns a wiser man from his visit to Jordan and Israel. John Cardinal O'Connor of New York tried to do right, stumbled into wrong, apologized for his blunder and returns a wiser man from his visit to Jordan and Israel. The Cardinal originally got embroiled when he took up cudgels for the Palestinian people's right to a homeland. Suspecting that the Cardinal didn't know very much about the nuances of the Middle East, Shimon Peres, then Israel's Prime Minister, extended an invitation to him to come visit. That suspicion proved correct; yet the Cardinal has learned from his error and taught by his example. Without realizing he was breaching Vatican policy, the Cardinal scheduled visits in Jerusalem with Israel's heads of state and government. That's wrong, in Vatican eyes, because the Pope does not recognize Israeli control over the Holy City. So the Cardinal canceled his appointments abruptly, and then compounded the slight to Israel by going ahead with his visits in Jordan to King Hussein and other leaders. Ultimately, the Cardinal softened the slight and salvaged honor all around by meeting with Mayor Teddy Kollek in Jerusalem. Why was that encounter acceptable, unlike the others? ''Because the city is not a political entity,'' declared the Mayor. ''It is an administrative entity.'' A demurring reporter said he couldn't understand the difference. ''Neither do I,'' said the Mayor. Of such stuff are quarrels made in the Middle East. The Vatican's policy does indeed offend sense. It can be said in mitigation that splitting hairs is not the newest practice in the Holy Land. Making the best of an inept business, Cardinal O'Connor and Mayor Kollek placed a good-humored call to Mayor Koch in New York. And the Cardinal declared: ''I failed to be sufficiently thorough in my preparations. I failed to familiarize myself with the protocols normally surrounding a visit by a member of the College of Cardinals. Because of that error on my part, unfortunately, it is quite understandable that the people of Israel and those in the Government might well have construed some deliberately intended offense.'' It's a handsome apology, graciously phrased to correct a blunder based on a Vatican policy that still awaits correction.
