548|1987\01\03|Selling the Name of the Game|Commercial sponsorship: it may be the biggest change in college football since the commercial timeout, and it may already be as annoying and obtrusive. Corporate sponsorship of individual games started last fall during the regular season, but it has become more noticeable with the renaming of holiday bowl games.|Commercial sponsorship: it may be the biggest change in college football since the commercial timeout, and it may already be as annoying and obtrusive. Corporate sponsorship of individual games started last fall during the regular season, but it has become more noticeable with the renaming of holiday bowl games. Commercial sponsorship: it may be the biggest change in college football since the commercial timeout, and it may already be as annoying and obtrusive. Corporate sponsorship of individual games started last fall during the regular season, but it has become more noticeable with the renaming of holiday bowl games. This year an insurance company put its John Hancock on the Sun Bowl; Sunkist squeezed into the Fiesta Bowl; Madza adopted the Gator Bowl, and an insurance company called U.S.F.& G. laid claim to the Sugar Bowl. With two dozen major and minor bowls available and bowl committees shedding their inhibitions about selling them, the trend promises to accelerate. Sponsorship gives the bowl committee a hefty chunk of cash, gives the corporation close identification with a popular event and gives the networks cheaper television rights. Everybody makes out, except maybe the longtime fan, left to wonder why even the name of the game is now commercialized. Actually, college football comes late to this business. Tennis fans have long since grown accustomed to the Volvo, Virginia Slims, Nabisco or other tournament. Tennis players have become walking billboards, with company names and logos plastered everywhere but on their bottoms. Professional golf also has long welcomed corporate sponsorship of tournaments. College football has been inhibited by tradition and by the need to maintain an illusion of amateurism. In theory, college games are pleasant diversions between enthusiastic young scholars; they just happen to play in huge stadiums and before television's millions. Corporate sponsorship further dispels that illusion. There could also be a plus here for the ordinary fan: fewer, shorter commercial timeouts. That should occur about the same time that plain tennis whites return to the U.S. Open.
