549|1987\01\03|The Worm and the Apple; Enforcement, Right and Wrong|Bellevue Breakdown For the latest example of New York City's inability to carry off construction, take a look at the new three-story psychiatric unit at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan. A judge ordered replacement of the psychiatric wards in 1982. The unit didn't become fully occupied until last January, two years behind schedule and 15 percent over the original $20 million budget.|Bellevue Breakdown For the latest example of New York City's inability to carry off construction, take a look at the new three-story psychiatric unit at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan. A judge ordered replacement of the psychiatric wards in 1982. The unit didn't become fully occupied until last January, two years behind schedule and 15 percent over the original $20 million budget. Bellevue Breakdown For the latest example of New York City's inability to carry off construction, take a look at the new three-story psychiatric unit at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan. A judge ordered replacement of the psychiatric wards in 1982. The unit didn't become fully occupied until last January, two years behind schedule and 15 percent over the original $20 million budget. The delay also cost the city an estimated $8 million in lost Federal and state reimbursement. What went wrong? Nearly everything. Walls were paneled before heating and ventilation ducts were installed. A ceiling went up without electrical wiring. Holes for lighting fixtures were cut in the wrong direction. Some 40,000 square feet of wood parquet floors - an area bigger than Central Park's Wollman Skating Rink - must be replaced because they buckle dangerously when mopped. For this mess, the Health and Hospitals Corporation deserves a worm. Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch support repeal of the state's outmoded Wicks Law that hampers big public works by requiring multiple contractors. For blocking its repeal, the biggest worm of all goes to the State Senate minority leader, Manfred Ohrenstein, and the majority leader, Warren Anderson. Pursuing Peddlers At long last, New York City has started enforcing its laws against street and sidewalk peddling. Until the last two weeks, Fifth Avenue had come to resemble what one merchant called ''Istanbul on a Sunday.'' With the holiday season, protests from Fifth Avenue store and property owners finally brought action against all the unlicensed peddlers hawking scarves, watches and trinkets from makeshift tables and blankets spread over half the sidewalk. The merchants' complaints are justified: peddlers steal business from legitimate retailers, block already crowded sidewalks and cheat the city of millions in unpaid taxes. During Christmas week, the Police Department's newly reinforced peddler patrol made more than 200 arrests and seized goods by the truckload. For the first time in memory, pedestrians were able to stroll Fifth Avenue virtually peddler-free from 42d Street to 59th Street. Mayor Koch deserves half an apple for this last-minute crackdown. He and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward will be entitled to a whole one if they expand holiday attention to Fifth Avenue into a year-round effort to clear busy sidewalks throughout midtown.
