551|1987\01\03|Brotherhood|Brothers sitting simultaneously in Congress are not precisely rare, but they are unusual. In recent years there were the Burtons of California, Phil and John, both members of the House; the Mortons of Maryland, Thruston in the Senate and Rogers C. B. in the House; the Cranes of Illinois, Dan and Phil, also in the House, and, of course, the Kennedys, Edward and Robert, of Massachusetts and New York, who overlapped in the Senate from 1962 to 1964. Correction: February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition|Brothers sitting simultaneously in Congress are not precisely rare, but they are unusual. In recent years there were the Burtons of California, Phil and John, both members of the House; the Mortons of Maryland, Thruston in the Senate and Rogers C. B. in the House; the Cranes of Illinois, Dan and Phil, also in the House, and, of course, the Kennedys, Edward and Robert, of Massachusetts and New York, who overlapped in the Senate from 1962 to 1964. Brothers sitting simultaneously in Congress are not precisely rare, but they are unusual. In recent years there were the Burtons of California, Phil and John, both members of the House; the Mortons of Maryland, Thruston in the Senate and Rogers C. B. in the House; the Cranes of Illinois, Dan and Phil, also in the House, and, of course, the Kennedys, Edward and Robert, of Massachusetts and New York, who overlapped in the Senate from 1962 to 1964. Earlier, in the middle of the last century, three Washburn brothers occupied seats in the House: Cadwallader of Wisconsin, Israel Jr. of Maine and Elihu of Illinois. The very first Congress, in fact, had a pair of brothers from Pennsylvania: Frederick Augustus Conrad Muhlenberg, who became Speaker of the House, and John Peter Gabriel Muhlenberg, also in the House. There are now only two brothers in the Congress, Senator Carl Levin of Michigan and Representative Sander Levin, from Detroit. Now the pair claim another distinction, a philatelic first, as it were. They say they have produced the first cachet, or seal on an envelope, ever created by brothers who are members of Congress. The seal, which commemorates the Michigan sesquicentennial, to be celebrated Jan. 26, is taken from the state seal. It depicts a man with a rifle watching the sun rise over a lake and is inscribed ''Tuebor,'' or ''I will defend.'' The siblings are printing 1,000 copies of the envelope to go on sale as first-day covers at $10, the proceeds to be donated to the American Philatelic Society's youth activities fund. WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING  Correction:  February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
