557|1987\01\03|Final Grade: 66-1|The cut on John Shaffer's forehead was from ''one of the sacks,'' but he said his dazed look came from ''all that hugging.''|The cut on John Shaffer's forehead was from ''one of the sacks,'' but he said his dazed look came from ''all that hugging.'' The cut on John Shaffer's forehead was from ''one of the sacks,'' but he said his dazed look came from ''all that hugging.'' Penn State football players even hug hard, particularly after winning the unofficial national college championship with a 14-10 victory over Miami in the Fiesta Bowl last night. Shaffer is an academic all-American, a walking advertisement for the propriety of the Penn State football program, a man who had lost only one of 66 games as a starting quarterback in his life, going back to the seventh grade. But that one loss had stung. It came in the Orange Bowl a year ago, when Penn State was swamped by Oklahoma, 25-10, and Shaffer was lifted in the second half. Last night he faced the specter of that one loss, in addition to the looming presence of the Heisman Trophy winner, Vinny Testaverde. Testaverde passed for 285 yards and Shaffer passed for only 53 yards, but Shaffer won the interception statistic, 1 to 5, and even rumbled for a touchdown in most inelegant fashion. With that glorious arm that took Miami downfield in the final minutes, Testaverde is quite likely to be wooed by Ray Perkins, the new chief executive officer of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who own the first pick in the National Football League draft. The Miami quarterback, who has spent one year at prep school and five years more or less on the college campus without hiding his disinterest in schoolwork, is otherwise known for falling off his motorbike and protecting his sack of burgers and fries. Shaffer, who passed for 1,510 yards this year, is also known for his 3.21 average, based upon 4 as a perfect score. He was named to the GTE Academic All-American team, which includes major players with averages of at least 3.2. And last night John Shaffer stood on the 44-yard-line (''my favorite number'') and watched the Heisman Trophy winner have a pass intecepted for the fifth time on fourth-and-goal. ''Pure ecstasy,'' was the way Shaffer described his feelings long afterward. ''I tell you what: We've got some of the neatest people on our football team. We share everything. ''Nothing was further from my mind than being vindicated,'' Shaffer replied to a question. ''We played a good football team and we scored just enough points to win the game.'' Shaffer is more likely to be recruited by major corporations and graduate schools than a professional team. He isn't giving up on being drafted, but he knew that his second straight chance at a national championship might be the last game of his career. His other championship game was a year ago in the Orange Bowl, when Penn State and Oklahoma met, knowing that Miami had blown its chance to Tennessee in the Sugar Bowl. This was before the Fiesta Bowl cut a deal with NBC to stretch New Year's Day to the night of Jan. 2, to capture the two unbeaten independent teams for a true showdown, with Joe Paterno of Penn State and many others campaigning to use this event as the springboard to an annual championship game. ''There is definitely a lot more hype for this one,'' Shaffer said the other day. ''This is the game, moved to prime time, probably one of the most-watched college events in a long time. ''What helps us,'' he added, ''was that we went through it last year.'' What he went through last year could also be called a wringer that included Brian Bosworth, the Oklahoma all-America punk-rock linebacker, and some pre-game ridicule from a few reporters and broadcasters in Miami. ''You had a 3.2 student, and before he ever threw the ball, he was being called a fraud,'' Paterno recalled. Paterno and Shaffer don't claim the scorn affected the quarterback, but he wound up completing 10 of 22 passes for only 74 yards and was intercepted three times. It was clear that the junior quarterback on a team contending for a national title could not throw the ball long enough and hard enough to score a few quick touchdowns, and Paterno pulled him in the second half. ''He made two bad plays,'' Paterno conceded the other day, ''but a lot of it is the way the game goes. We gave up a bomb early and we were always behind. We never got 'em out of whack. And in fairness to John, our wideouts and offensive line were only ordinary.'' After losing as a starting quarterback for the first time in his life, Shaffer spent three days in Miami with his parents before returning to campus. He has said he did not brood over the loss; others say he did. ''He took it,'' Paterno said. ''He kept his pride. He's very mature. He just couldn't wait for the next game. All year, I've seen a lot of bounce out there.'' The bounce is as much mental as physical. Shaffer doesn't run or throw with professional potential, but he is a fine quarterback for a program that traditionally produces more great defensive players than offensive players. Last night, Shaffer could not move the team at all until Miami scored. Paterno said of the total 5-for-16 passing: ''I didn't think Shaffer had much time. John's the kind of guy who gets it done, if you give him time.'' Shaffer produced a 74-yard drive in 13 plays that ended with his rolling right for a 4-yard touchdown. ''We had to wait for the play to develop,'' Shaffer said.. ''I didn't see it, so I had to run with the ball.'' He just did rumble across the right corner to help tie the game. Then Shane Conlan, the latest of the great Penn State linebackers, playing with reinjured legs, ran 38 yards with an interception to reach the Miami 5. Shaffer fumbled the handoff on first down and Keith Radecic, his center, recovered for a 1-yard loss. Then Shaffer made sure D. J. Dozier had his hands on the ball, and the line opened a hole for the touchdown that won a national title. Shaffer's role was not of a Heisman Trophy winner, but that of another willing hand on a disciplined team -but last night that was quite enough for John Shaffer, academic all-American, winning quarterback for the 66th time in 67 games. SPORTS OF THE TIMES
