57|1987\01\01|FAMILIES PLEASED WITH 'OPEN ADOPTIONS'|Nine months after the ''open adoption'' of Erin McGarvey became final, the biological and adoptive parents of the 3-year-old retarded child agree that the unusual arrangement to share her is working well.|Nine months after the ''open adoption'' of Erin McGarvey became final, the biological and adoptive parents of the 3-year-old retarded child agree that the unusual arrangement to share her is working well. Nine months after the ''open adoption'' of Erin McGarvey became final, the biological and adoptive parents of the 3-year-old retarded child agree that the unusual arrangement to share her is working well. Erin's biological mother said she had not seen her daughter for about six months but found comfort in knowing that when she wanted to see and hold her she could. Her husband, Erin's biological father, takes Erin's older sister to visit the child about every six weeks. Erin's two families live a few miles apart. In her adoptive family, Erin has four older sisters, including one who was also adopted, an older brother, a dog, a rabbit and three cats. ''It's very advantageous for her to be in a family with other children, which is exactly what her parents wanted for her,'' said her adoptive mother, Carol McGarvey. ''She became so animated because there is just so much going on.'' When she arrived at the McGarveys' home in this section of Barnstable on Cape Cod, Erin, who has Down's syndrome, was unable to sit up. Today, she has begun to walk and talk and has the development level of an 18-month-old. Her biological parents and 8-year-old sister form part of an extended family, according to Mrs. McGarvey. ''They're there for financial support,'' she said. ''They're there for emotional support. They're there if we need it.'' They have brought over some of their older daughter's clothes ''as if passing down items from one child to another like she's still in the family,'' Mrs. McGarvey said. They also have brought Erin gifts. ''Yes, it's working out,'' said Mrs. McGarvey. ''We're still really glad we did it.'' Erin's adoption attracted nationwide attention when it became final March 14, although the surrender papers had been signed in June 1985. Her biological mother said she decided to give Erin up after keeping her for 14 months because the child's needs overwhelmed her. She had lost a baby to meningitis nearly three years earlier and her husband, a fisherman, was often away from home, making it difficult to deal with Erin, she said. It was ''probably the most wrenching decision a woman would have to make,'' she said, and ''I just have to to be real positive about the choice and know that I did it out of love for Erin.'' ''I can honestly say I don't regret the decision,'' the 34-year-old biological mother, who asked not to be identified, said in a recent interview. ''Of course, I can honestly say, I wish I never had to go through it.'' The family did not put Erin up for adoption at birth because her husband thought it was ''too dramatic a step to take,'' she said. But she said she felt a bit apathetic toward the baby because of her own bitter feelings. ''I suppose the martyr thing to have done would have been to keep Erin for all the wrong reasons and I could have been as miserable as I wanted behind my closed doors,'' she said. Mrs. McGarvey said she understood and admired Erin's biological mother. ''I think it is absolutely fantastic,'' she said, ''to be able to put aside all your motherly feeling and say, 'This is what I have to do for what's best for her.' I think it's the most unselfish thing you could do.'' ''I feel I've said my goodbyes,'' said Erin's biological mother. ''There will be a need for me in another six months to see her,'' she said. ''I can feel it building. The special kind of bond I feel for Erin won't die.''
