576|1987\01\03|NASA Reached '73 Thiokol Decision Objectively|To the Editor:|To the Editor: To the Editor: In an article (front page, Dec. 8) and an editorial (''The Past in the Shuttle's Future,'' Dec. 9), you have reported, stimulated and supported the outrageous canard that James C. Fletcher, director of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, who was the agency's administrator from 1971 to 1977, awarded the contract for the space shuttle's solid-fuel booster rockets in 1973 to the Thiokol Corporation because of pro-Utah bias. This accusation not only unjustly impugns the motives and reputation of a fine man, an honest and good public servant, but it also happens to be untrue. I know. As NASA's associate administrator for organization and management, I shared in making the final decision, along with George Low, deputy administrator (now deceased) and Jim Fletcher. NASA's process for evaluating competing proposals and selecting the winner is regulated by rules to compel objectivity and eliminate bias. In particular, selection officials are not involved in choosing the evaluating teams. In the case of the booster-rockets competition, the source evaluation -done after study by some hundreds of experts drawn from five NASA centers, NASA headquarters and the Army, Navy and Air Force, and scored by an evaluation board of 11 -indicated that three of the proposers rated essentially even in mission suitability, and that the fourth proposal (that of Aerojet, the only proposer, incidentally, of a nonsegmented booster) was ranked significantly lower in suitability and didn't offer any cost advantage over the others. It was also indicated that Thiokol's likely cost advantage over the others was significant in every area. After the reports had been studied, and their authors interrogated at length, and after NASA's key people had stated their views from their respective areas of responsibility, Jim Fletcher, Mr. Low and I met in private to review the evidence and make the decision. I remember volunteering that, faced with essentially a standoff in indicated mission suitability, I favored Thiokol because of the indicated lower cost. Mr. Low concurred, though noting that recent awards had put a lot on Thiokol's plate, and we needed to make sure that Thiokol devoted the necessary resources to our project. Jim Fletcher, who up to that point had vigorously questioned the participants but had not expressed any conclusions, said O.K., but the selection statement must mention the desirability of ultimately having a second source when boosters were required in quantity, or words to that effect. All of us signed the statement. I don't remember anything about a Utah connection being mentioned or considered. Neither George Low nor I had any Utah involvement. In short, it was not Jim Fletcher's Utah background that figured in the decision, but the collection of objective factors in the four proposals on which the decision had to be made. Having worked closely with Jim Fletcher on Apollo, shuttle, planetary and other scientific projects, budget battles and other tasks, I know him to be a person of great moral integrity, objective to a fault and devoted to the public good. His current job, which he did not seek, is hard enough without forcing him to endure baseless and irresponsible insinuations. He has done nothing that disqualifies him from participating in decisions on booster-rocket design for the future, and he should not disqualify himself from doing so. For you to suggest that by the source-selection decision made in 1973 he ''set the course for last January's fiery shipwreck'' is not up to the level of comment that one expects from you. RICHARD C. MCCURDY Darien, Conn., Dec. 12, 1986
