577|1987\01\03|Mental-Health System Shouldn't Be a Dump for the Dangerous|To the Editor:|To the Editor: To the Editor: I would like to add a point to your report that some states are changing their laws to make it easier to commit the mentally ill for involuntary treatment (Science Times, Dec. 9). I believe there is conflict over commitment laws largely because they serve two widely disparate social objectives. The first is to provide humane treatment for psychotic patients. The second, less acknowledged but unfortunately widely practiced, is to commit potentially dangerous people who have little or no mental illness because the legal system does not provide any other mechanism to protect society from them. As you quote Steven J. Schwartz, a lawyer who has defended mental-patient rights, ''Even criminals can get a lawyer and see a judge,'' which means, that unless a crime has been committed, the legal system is impotent to protect society from an individual widely perceived as dangerous. Civil-rights advocates have been very effective in protecting the liberty interests of potentially dangerous people. However noble their objectives, there remains the pragmatic problem of what to do with someone who is perceived as dangerous but not necessarily mentally ill. Perhaps this is the real issue that society and the legal system need to address. The mental-health system should not be involved with people who are behavior problems but not mentally ill. Psychiatrists and allied mental-health professions could then provide effective treatment to the mentally ill, including appropriate committal. Behavior problems could be dealt with by the courts. This might require legal recourse to preventive detention, and civil-rights advocates would object. However, the issue should be debated directly without involving mental illness in it. Society apparently needs a way of dealing with the potentially dangerous, and commitment laws are now the only mechanism. The present system of dealing with dangerous people through the mental-health system does a disservice to the mentally ill. The average mentally ill person is no more dangerous than the average citizen, although this is not the general impression. Using commitment laws to detain dangerous people perpetuates this misperception. The average former convict is much more likely to commit a future crime than the average psychiatric patient. Further, the mentally ill are often deprived of humane treatment because of others' concerns about their civil rights. Finally, a separate issue is the right to treatment of the mentally ill. As you point out, the New York State Court of Appeals has ruled that a patient, committed or not, cannot be treated with medication against his or her will except in emergency without a judicial decision. This decision was to insure a patient's ''liberty interests.'' However, people may also have a right to enjoy freedom from psychosis. Civil liberties are difficult to appreciate in a psychotic state. As Dr. Siegel and Dr. Schwarz of the Beth Israel Medical Center stated in the Area II American Psychiatric Association Bulletin for September-October 1986, ''Freedom from psychosis is more consistent with liberty than freedom from medication.'' JOHN H. BEAMER, M.D. Potsdam, N.Y., Dec. 10, 1986 The writer, a psychiatrist, is clinical director of the St. Lawrence County Mental Health Clinic.
