581|1987\01\03|New Kitchenware for a Healthy New Year|Resolutions for the New Year, no doubt, included a promise to eat more responsibly, to replace the fried chicken with baked chicken, the ice cream at midnight with carrot sticks, the grilled salmon and beurre blanc with plain grilled fish. Those were the resolutions, but what are you doing about them?|Resolutions for the New Year, no doubt, included a promise to eat more responsibly, to replace the fried chicken with baked chicken, the ice cream at midnight with carrot sticks, the grilled salmon and beurre blanc with plain grilled fish. Those were the resolutions, but what are you doing about them? Resolutions for the New Year, no doubt, included a promise to eat more responsibly, to replace the fried chicken with baked chicken, the ice cream at midnight with carrot sticks, the grilled salmon and beurre blanc with plain grilled fish. Those were the resolutions, but what are you doing about them? The word for 1987 is that you can have it all and still be adult about your diet. Just set aside some of the Christmas gift money for a few pieces of new kitchen equipment. This year's popular new appliances are not deep fat fryers or Belgian waffle makers. They are nonstick pans, pint-size food processors, trouble-free pressure cookers and, best of all, an up-to-date version of the soda fountain milkshake maker. What brought this equipment to mind was the arrival in my kitchen of the nifty little electric machine appropriately called Shakemaker, though the manufacturer is talking of renaming it Slimshake or Slimshaker in deference to the nutrition-conscious public. The Shakemaker, manufactured by Donvier, produces milkshakes that don't have a bit of fat and that seem almost as creamy and rich as those made with ice cream. Filling, too. I have been playing with mine for 10 days and have started drinking milk again. Skim milk, at that - what my children used to call blue milk because of its color. All you need to do to satisfy your desire for something seemingly rich and slightly sweet is put three-quarters of a cup of skim milk in the shaker container, put it in the freezer for 10 minutes, add the flavorings, process with the motorized top for 20 seconds, and presto! You have a midnight snack that will not play havoc with your diet - 100 to 150 calories for a mixture that contains coffee powder, a teaspoon of sugar or orange juice concentrate, and two teaspoons of plain low-fat yogurt. Of course you can make the shakes with ice cream, but that is another matter. The recipe book that comes with the Shakemaker suggests using low-calorie sweeteners, but I prefer to add 16 calories' worth of sugar (one teaspoon) when I need sweetening. The Shakemaker is available at Bloomingdale's for $34.95 and at Macy's Herald Square for $29.99. After listening for months to commercials for Oskar, the pint-size food processor designed for people with small apartments, or who don't like to cook much or who think a full-size food processor is too complicated, I was still not convinced. But when it was suggested that it offered an especially quick, easy way to puree vegetables for thickening sauces, it seemed to fit the criteria for healthful appliances. And is it fast! It makes carrot slices into puree in the flick of an eye. So if you want tasty sauces for broiled fish or chicken without using cream or butter, put this little dynamo to work. It is almost as quick at shredding and slicing, making it easy to stir-fry vegetables, and it cleans up in a jiffy. The Oskar Food Processor is $64.99 at Macy's Herald Square; $64.95 at Zabar's, 2245 Broadway (at 80th Street); $69.95 at Columbus Avenue General Store, 207 Columbus Avenue (at 70th Street), and $69.99 at 1st Stop Housewares, 1025 Second Avenue (near 54th Street). I operated my first pressure cooker when I was 10 years old, so it was difficult to convince me that there could be any advances in pressure cooker technology that would make a new one worth the money. But in fact the one that Cuisinarts calls a pressure cooker-steamer is a great improvement over the old version: The cook no longer has to fiddle with the flame interminably to keep the pressure constant. As with any pressure cooker, this one retains the vitamins, minerals and natural flavor of food better than other methods, and it uses very little water. Almost as attractive is the fact that this cooker can be opened immediately, without waiting for the pressure gauge to go down by itself. I tried a whole 4 1/2-pound chicken in the cooker, first browning it and then cooking it under pressure for 30 minutes. Even though I seasoned it with nothing but the cup of chicken broth in which it was cooked - no carrots, no onions, no salt - and removed the skin before eating, the chicken was as succulent as any I have ever tasted. This is not an inexpensive piece of equipment, but people who like stews or soups and don't have the patience or time to cook them in the regular way will find plenty of use for this handsome pot. The current pamphlet of recipes enclosed with the pot is a bit thin, but a card in each box entitles the recipient to send away for the more definitive booklet, which will be available at the end of January. The Cuisinart Quiet Pressure Cooker/Steamer comes in three sizes: 4, 6 and 8 quarts at suggested retail prices of $150, $165 and $180. At Macy's Herald Square the 6-quart cooker is $165, and at Columbus Avenue General Store it is $149.95; at 1st Stop Houswares the 4-quart cooker is $150. One other piece of equipment that has been around much longer than these but is equally useful for healthful cooking is the nonstick skillet. The coating, as everyone already knows, makes it possible to cook with next to no fat, but as professional chefs have discovered just a little fat for flavor and browning makes it possible to achieve an attractive product as well as one that tastes as good as anything cooked in a quarter of a cup of butter. There are many coated skillets of various quality: the Silverstone-coated Bourgeat pans from France are extremely well made. Dean & DeLuca, 12 Prince Street, near Wooster Street, sells the 11 1/2-inch Bourgeat Silverstone skillet for $58; it is $65.99 at Expression Unltd., 165 Washington Valley Road, Warren N.J. DE GUSTIBUS
