583|1987\01\03|The Funds Try Personal Touch|MUTUAL funds have traditionally been bought and sold via the telephone and the mails. But many of the big fund managers, particularly those that sell the ''no-load,'' or commissionless, variety, are opening walk-in offices, where the public can obtain literature, ask questions - and buy the company's funds.|MUTUAL funds have traditionally been bought and sold via the telephone and the mails. But many of the big fund managers, particularly those that sell the ''no-load,'' or commissionless, variety, are opening walk-in offices, where the public can obtain literature, ask questions - and buy the company's funds. MUTUAL funds have traditionally been bought and sold via the telephone and the mails. But many of the big fund managers, particularly those that sell the ''no-load,'' or commissionless, variety, are opening walk-in offices, where the public can obtain literature, ask questions - and buy the company's funds. Fidelity Investments, which has 38 of these offices around the country, opened a large street-floor Investor Center on Park Avenue in New York late last year. The Dreyfus Corporation, with six Personal Financial Centers in the New York metropolitan area, will open 25 deposit centers at Bank of New York branches and other key locations this month. T. Rowe Price, Scudder Stevens & Clark, Vanguard, Stein Roe & Farnham and Calvert are among the other fund organizations with offices open to customers and potential customers. In addition, some fund management companies are sharing space. For example, the Financial Information Centers of America leased space last year at a Fort Worth shopping center, and then subleased it to about 40 financial institutions, including funds, Three similar centers at malls in other cities are scheduled to open during the next four months. ''It's a trend that has been developing,'' said A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services, which analyzes mutual funds. ''It started with money market funds in the very early 80's and broadened out since then with those who were strong in equity funds. Most people in this country are now used to getting information orally, rather than through reading.'' Not all of the investment centers have succeeded. Fidelity, for instance, participated in a group experiment in a supermarket that was discontinued because of inadequate volume. And the 20-year-old Merrill Lynch Investment Information Center in New York's Grand Central Terminal closed this week when its lease expired. Nevertheless, there appears to be sufficient public interest in on-site consultations with knowledgeable advisers to support the continued development of mutual fund centers. And with some fund companies also becoming active in discount brokerage, where the personal touch may be helpful, industry leaders indicate that the size and scope of such centers are likely to grow in the years ahead. ''There are certain people who feel very comfortable getting on the phone or putting money in the mail,'' said Howard Stein, chairman of Dreyfus. ''But some people need some guidance as to what to do with the explosion of choices you have today.'' Edward C. Johnson 3d, chairman of Fidelity, said: ''A lot of people like to sit down and develop a personal relationship with an individual at a center. They want to 'kick the tires' and see what the organization is like.'' Part of the reason for the widening attention being given to centers by fund companies is the rising competition with other segments of the financial services business. ''Direct marketing people with no-loads are competing more and more with broker-distributed products,'' said James S. Riepe, director of the mutual funds division at T. Rowe Price Associates, which plans to open its first center in Los Angeles this year. There is a tendency, moreover, to situate these mutual fund centers - at least the first ones opened by an organization - in its home territory. Thus Vanguard has two centers in the Philadelphia area, Calvert has two in Washington, D.C., and Stein Roe & Farnham has one in Chicago. ''We found there are literally thousands of people in Chicago that take advantage of this location,'' said Marshal B. Front, executive vice president of Stein Roe. ''And it raises the visibility of our funds in ways other than direct advertising and direct mail.'' George Johnston, president of Scudder Stevens & Clark, which has about a half-dozen centers, said they attracted many kinds of people. ''Some are just people in the neighborhood and some are professionals like lawyers and accountants,'' he said. ''We've had as much as $900,000 right across the counter and as little as $1,000.'' Personal visits to an office, however, will probably continue to be an auxiliary method of learning about, and buying, mutual funds. ''It's a little problematical as to how much of that business is incremental,'' John C. Bogle, chairman of the Vanguard Group, said. ''And it's an expensive, expensive thing to do.'' And Mr. Lipper said: ''If there aren't enough natural sales, there could either be forced stimulation to make inappropriate sales, or the cost of operating the funds could go up. But they are not major negatives at the moment.''  YOUR MONEY
