589|1987\01\03|A Grab Bag of New Protection|NEW YORK STATE passed 79 laws last year that affect consumers who live in or pass through the state.|NEW YORK STATE passed 79 laws last year that affect consumers who live in or pass through the state. NEW YORK STATE passed 79 laws last year that affect consumers who live in or pass through the state. Some, like the law that prohibskiers in New York from trying to ride chairlifts without first buying a ticket, have limited application. Others, like the statewide ban on the use of sulfites to preserve fresh fruits and vegetables, affect just about everybody. All the new consumer laws were passed by the state Senate and Assembly in the 1986 legislative session and have been signed by Governor Cuomo. Most have already gone into effect; the others will take effect at various times from now until 1988. Perhaps the most highly publicized new law was an amendment to New York's ''lemon law,'' which was enacted in 1983. The original law was intended to help consumers get refunds or replacements in cases where a new car turned out to be a lemon. The amendment, which took effect Aug. 2, extends the law to leased cars where the lease requires the consumer to pay for repairs. The amendment also created an independent arbitration program. Previously, the automobile makers had set up their own arbitration programs to resolve consumer complaints, which had led some consumer advocates to compare the process to a fox guarding a henhouse. The new state laws are more concerned with motor vehicles than with any other consumer product or service. All-terrain vehicles, for example, must be registered in 1987, and their owners must pay sales and use taxes at the time of registration. In addition, operators of all-terrain vehicles are required to have liability insurance. Shops in New York City that sell parts from junked cars must now be licensed with the city's Consumer Affairs Department, which means that consumers with complaints can turn to the department to resolve them. In a setback for advocates of the metric system, the state eliminated its requirement that speedometers on cars manufactured after Sept. 1, 1980, register speeds in both miles and kilometers per hour. Shops that rustproof automobiles are now required to guarantee their work for five years, no if's or but's. The law was designed to prevent stratagems some rustproofers had used to void guarantees. All school buses in the state are now required to have seat belts. Another highly publicized new law was the ''toxic torts bill,'' which gives people who have been harmed by five toxic substances until July 29 to revive their legal claims for damages by filing lawsuits. The law was designed to help people who discovered after the statute of limitations had run out that they had been harmed by the five substances - diethyl stilbestrol (DES), asbestos, chlordane, tungsten-carbide or polyvinylchloride (PVC). For similar cases in the future, the new law enables people to sue for personal injury or property damage for up to three years after their discovery of an injury from any harmful substance. Previously, when people developed health problems long after their exposure to a harmful substance, it was often too late under the statute of limitations to sue. Among other health-related laws is one that prohibits selling over-the-counter drugs after the expiration date given on the package. Patients have also been given broader access to documents concerning their care and treatment. The laws reflect the diversity of consumer concerns and complaints. For instance, some consumers may be heartened to learn that information disclosed in any polygraph examinations they have taken can no longer be used to deny them credit. Companies that promise to improve credit ratings must tell their clients how they could do so on their own. Bicycles manufactured after Jan. 1, 1989, must bear a serial number and anyone caught scratching the number off can be fined up to $250. Consumers who sign up for dating services can now specify how far they would be willing to travel for a date. Stores that rent televisions and other products through rent-to-buy plans cannot charge more than twice the ticket price. An amendment to the penal law makes it illegal for computer users to tap into other people's computers without authorization. Rockland County businesses that sue consumers must say in court papers whether or not they are licensed, and if they do not give this information to the person they are suing he or she can move to dismiss the suit. The New York State Consumer Protection Board has a booklet, ''1986 Legislative Wrap-Up,'' that summarizes all the consumer laws passed this year. It is free to anyone who sends a postcard requesting it to the New York State Consumer Protection Board, P.O. Box 6, 1 Commerce Plaza, Albany, N.Y. 12260. SATURDAY CONSUMER
