593|1987\01\03|SHOPPING FOR CONTECT LENSES: CAUTION IS ADVISED|When Tara Bowman decided to switch to contact lenses after 10 years of wearing eyeglasses, she shopped for convenience and bought a pair of soft lenses from a discount optical store near her office. The purchase was simple and the contacts were inexpensive.|When Tara Bowman decided to switch to contact lenses after 10 years of wearing eyeglasses, she shopped for convenience and bought a pair of soft lenses from a discount optical store near her office. The purchase was simple and the contacts were inexpensive. When Tara Bowman decided to switch to contact lenses after 10 years of wearing eyeglasses, she shopped for convenience and bought a pair of soft lenses from a discount optical store near her office. The purchase was simple and the contacts were inexpensive. But before long, Ms. Bowman felt a scratchy feeling on one of her eyes -as if there was dust under the lens, she said. When she returned to the store, she was told not to worry. ''They said that a lot of people feel discomfort or have trouble adjusting to their first pair of soft lenses,'' Ms. Bowman recalled. ''They certainly didn't examine my eye to see if there was something under the lens.'' During the next year, Ms. Bowman bought four more pairs of contacts from the discount store, yet the irritation continued. Finally, she gave up and went to a private optometrist, who gave her an optical examination and found that the brand of lens she was wearing was incompatible with her eyes. Her experience is not uncommon among today's approximately 18 million contact lens wearers, who are faced - or blessed - with a variety of contacts to choose from and a variety of outlets that sell them. Soft lenses in particular are becoming easily available, and the options as to types can be bewildering. A Wide-Open Market At one time, soft lenses could be purchased only through private practitioners, and only at very high prices. When the Food and Drug Administration first approved soft lenses in 1971, a typical pair cost several hundred dollars, and one manufacturer - Bausch & Lomb -produced almost all the country's lenses. The market has split wide open in the last several years, profoundly altering both prices and buying patterns. Nearly 100 companies now manufacture soft lenses, and a 1977 Supreme Court decision allowing doctors to advertise has spurred a price war in soft lens sales. It is now possible to get a pair, depending on where you are and what kind of package you purchase, for as little as $15. At the same time, thousands of neighborhood discount contact lens ''clinics'' and chain stores - among the largest are Pearle Vision, Sterling Optical and Sears Optical - have sprung up around the country, and now account for some 15 to 20 percent of the market in eye care. Although all soft lenses on the market have been approved by the F.D.A., ''there are some differences between the lenses provided by the different companies,'' said Dr. David Haight, an ophthalmologist who is acting director of a contact lens clinic at Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital. ''There is price variability - the most inexpensive are the ones available in 'one-size-fits-all.' '' Discount Stores for 'Easy Fits' In general, ophthalmologists and optometrists who are in private practice say discount stores are acceptable for patients who have bought contacts before and who have uncomplicated prescriptions and healthy eyes. ''Many of these places can serve those people who are 'easy fits,' '' Dr. Haight said. ''The problem is, until you go to a doctor you don't know if you're an easy fit or not.'' Discount store operators say that the stores' convenient locations, low prices and flexible hours - many are open evenings and weekends - have infused the industry with healthy competition and have been a boon to consumers. ''We've made contact lenses affordable to people who couldn't afford them in the past,'' said Linda Landers, a vice president of America's Best Contacts and Eyeglasses, a chain with more than 30 branches in a number of states. 'Advantage Is Convencience' Dr. Mike Simons, a vice president at Pearle Health Services, which owns about 900 Pearle Vision Centers nationwide, said: ''The real advantage to the consumer is convenience. That's how Pearle has created a niche for itself.'' Many private practitioners, though, contend that the discount outlets care more about profits than patients. Customers are being bilked into buying ill-fitting, uncomfortable contacts, they say, and, more seriously, are getting care that is cursory at best. ''The ordinary complaints I get are that the lenses fit so poorly that the patient is constantly uncomfortable, can't see, or has miserable-looking eyes filled with secretions,'' said Dr. Jay L. Klessman, a Washington optometrist. Although procedures vary widely from store to store, even among different branches of the same chain, discount stores generally have at least one in-house optometrist to do eye exams and write prescriptions. In some stores, customers say, eye exams take less than 10 minutes and many crucial tests are omitted. Other contact lens users are pleased with discount outlets. William Rocco, a Washington resident who had worn soft lenses for several years, went to one such store after he lost a contact and realized his insurance policy had lapsed. He purchased two pairs of lenses for just $39, and says he has had no trouble with them. ''I needed contacts, and I didn't want to spend a whole lot of money,'' he said. ''I probably saved $150.''
