599|1987\01\03|HIDING FLAWS WITH NEW CORRECTIVE COSMETICS|A multitude of sins can be camouflaged with the right makeup. But while many women may look their best with just a dusting of blusher and a stroke of lipstick, others need the cloak of more concealing cosmetics designed to erase reality.|A multitude of sins can be camouflaged with the right makeup. But while many women may look their best with just a dusting of blusher and a stroke of lipstick, others need the cloak of more concealing cosmetics designed to erase reality. A multitude of sins can be camouflaged with the right makeup. But while many women may look their best with just a dusting of blusher and a stroke of lipstick, others need the cloak of more concealing cosmetics designed to erase reality. Increasingly, cosmetics companies have been developing products to meet these special needs. The market has grown in recent years to include makeup for men and women troubled by disfiguring birthmarks, pigmentation problems, burns, scars and bruises after plastic surgery. Such makeup can help victims of violent crime. Last June, the face of a model, Marla Hanson, was slashed with a razor. After surgery, cosmetics helped to conceal the scars. These products are not only cover-ups for the face, but conceal varicose veins, so-called age spots on the hands and even stretch marks on the torso or legs. These skin-tone foundations are thick, opaque, waterproof and long-wearing. They cling to scar tissue, which is slick and difficult to cover. Several New Products Esteem, a new company, offers fragrance-free foundations, color cosmetics, skin-care products, eye shadows and a mild alcohol-free shampoo. The line is sold by the company at 201 East 69th Street, New York, N.Y. l0021. Its telephone number is 212-4l8-65ll. On Tuesday mornings the company offers free makeup-application classes to patients of the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary Facial Plastics Clinic. Company representatives offer consultations to patients at physicians' offices. Esteem joins a list of established companies offering an ever-expanding number of concealing creams. Probably the oldest product on the market is Covermark, an opaque cream made by Lydia O'Leary and introduced about 50 years ago. More recently, a stick and crayon form of the product were introduced. A product for the legs will be introduced in March. Cover Creme, which was introduced three years ago by Dermablend Corrective Cosmetics, is a similar type of concealer available in a cream form. Last summer, the company introduced Leg Cover, a concealer for larger areas of the body. Soft Touch, a powder to soften the finish of the skin and add a hint of color, will be introduced this month. Clinique, which is a larger cosmetics company and is geared to a general market, offers Continuous Coverage, a thick, opaque liquid. Prices for corrective foundations range from $9.50 for l.2 ounces of Continuous Coverage to $22.50 for one-half ounce of Esteem's Totally Perfect Cover-Up. Manufacturers say conventional makeup products hide skin flaws, but not all provide the coverage and consistency needed to adhere to scar tissue and conceal dark bruises. And most are not free of fragrance, the culprit behind many adverse reactions. This can be particularly important after corrective surgery. Companies advise getting a physician's approval before using the cosmetics. Surgeons generally recommend waiting 48 hours after sutures are removed before applying makeup, which should not touch suture areas until they have healed. Skin that has been abraded to erase wrinkles or acne scars, for example, should not be covered with makeup until it is well healed, which takes about two weeks, according to Dr. Gary S. Bromley, an attending plastic surgeon at the New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital. Peggy Skinner, executive director of the Burn Foundation in Augusta, Ga., who is Esteem's director of patient services, advises testing a facial cosmetic on a small area of the face before applying it more widely. Certain products have not been tested on postoperative skin before marketing, according to manufacturers. Physicians and makeup artists have found that the relief provided by these products is psychological as much as physical. ''They can reduce the telltale signs of surgery and get the person back to relatively normal activities earlier than would ordinarily be possible,'' said Dr. Sherrell J. Aston, associate professsor of plastic surgery at the New York University School of Medicine. Makeup Boosts Self-Confidence In many cases, specialists say, a covering of makeup often gives a person the self-confidence needed to confront the world without the sting of self-consciousness or embarrassment. David Nicholas, a cosmetician who is a volunteer at the makeup clinic at the Shriners Burns Institute, a hospital in Boston, recalls applying makeup to the legs of a girl who was severely burned from the waist down when she was 7 years old. ''She's l7 now and she hadn't worn a dress in 10 years or gone to a school dance,'' he said. ''She became a recluse in her own little world. After I applied Covermark to cover the discoloration of the burn and recommended opaque nylons to cover the disfiguration, you'd never know she had a problem. She called me recently. She told me she went out and bought a dress. She wore it to her school dance.''
