602|1987\01\03|SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ|Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on page 44. 1. Syzygy is partly to blame for this condition. What is it? 2. The city government of Beijing announced there would be a dramatic change in the way local elections are held. What is the change? 3. The United States is going ahead with plans to build two new large radar systems despite a sharp debate over whether they would violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty.|Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on page 44. 1. Syzygy is partly to blame for this condition. What is it? 2. The city government of Beijing announced there would be a dramatic change in the way local elections are held. What is the change? 3. The United States is going ahead with plans to build two new large radar systems despite a sharp debate over whether they would violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on page 44. 1. Syzygy is partly to blame for this condition. What is it? 2. The city government of Beijing announced there would be a dramatic change in the way local elections are held. What is the change? 3. The United States is going ahead with plans to build two new large radar systems despite a sharp debate over whether they would violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. Where are the new installations to be constructed? 4. A politician told reporters that 1986 was ''the most painful year I can recall from my childhood on.'' Who was it? 5. The Commerce Department released gloomy figures that Robert Ortner, the department's top economist, termed ''horrendous.'' What were the figures? 6. A rapidly growing program, hailed in Mexico as the most positive development on the nation's economic scene, is becoming a focus of increasing concern in the United States. What is the program? 7. A discovery with vast implications for such fields as electrical transmission, energy storage and generation of fusion energy has been made by scientists at the University of Houston and at A.T.&.T Bell Laboratories. What is it? 8. Japan crossed a politically critical threshold, abandoning a 10-year-old policy. What was the policy? 9. After a study of New York City services, the Citizens Budget Committee said, ''We could find only two that were well managed.'' What were the two? 10. According to a recent national survey, (20/40/60) percent of Americans get no regular exercise. 11. Three thousand United States troops have begun a joint four-month military exercise with what country? 12. General Motors saw sales of some of its most profitable cars decline 51 percent in the first 11 months of 1986, which analysts figure will reduce earnings by some $500 million this year. What are the cars? 13. Indochina's most famous refugee camp, Khao I Dang, still home to 26,000 Cambodian refugees, will be closed. Where is it? 14. As Federal loans to students have almost tripled while grants that do not have to be repaid have declined sharply, how many undergraduates now leave school in debt, according to a report by the Joint Economic Committee of Congress? 15. The largest fine ever imposed for a criminal violation of Federal environmental laws was imposed on the USM Corporation by a Federal district judge in Boston. How much was the fine? What was the charge? 16. Fifty years ago this week, Hank Luisetti fired a shot that started a revolution. What happened? 17. There has been a surge in year-end charitable giving. The Independent Sector, a coalition of charities, estimates that under the new tax law nonprofit organizations will lose at least ($11/$21/$25) billion in charitable contributions annually. 18. Public Law 99-494 is designed to encourage efforts ''aimed at restoring the act of reading to a place of pre-eminence in our personal lives and in the life of our nation.'' What does the law do? 19. President Reagan has said he will ask Congress to restore millions of dollars in financial cuts for an organization he praised as taking ''an historic step to adopt sweeping reforms of its organization and methods of operation.'' What is the organization? 20. The Soviet Union rejected a proposal by the United States for an exchange of televised New Year's greetings between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Why?
