607|1987\01\03|INVESTMENT BANKERS GO WEST|Because American corporations are more willing to switch from one investment banking firm to another, the investment bankers are scrambling to find new customers - and keep old ones - by setting up shop far from the canyons of Wall Street.|Because American corporations are more willing to switch from one investment banking firm to another, the investment bankers are scrambling to find new customers - and keep old ones - by setting up shop far from the canyons of Wall Street. Because American corporations are more willing to switch from one investment banking firm to another, the investment bankers are scrambling to find new customers - and keep old ones - by setting up shop far from the canyons of Wall Street. Nowhere has this been more true than in Chicago, which in recent years has firmly established itself as the nation's Second City in investment banking. Indeed, by some estimates, the number of investment banking professionals in Chicago has soared to 250, twice what it was in 1980 - but still just a fraction of the number in New York. ''The firms are trying to move investment bankers closer to their customers, rather than have all their people in New York,'' said Perrin Long, who follows the securities industry for Lipper Analytical Services. ''That makes it easier for them to develop relationships, to get out to the golf course with a potential client, to go for a drink after work.'' Traditional Ties Weaken This decentralization has gathered momentum as the traditional ties between corporation and investment banker have weakened: Companies are turning increasingly to whichever firm has developed the best new financial products to meet their needs. And as these investment banks churn out more new products than ever before, they find they need hordes of marketing people from coast to coast to tell companies how the latest products can help them. ''It used to be that to help your customers you had to be in New York, because that was the place to access the capital markets,'' said Leonard S. Caronia, a senior vice president in the First Chicago Corporation's investment banking operations. ''But today, you can access the markets from anywhere, so what drives the investment banking business today is being close to your customers.'' Industry experts say that since Chicago has such heavyweights as Sears, McDonald's, Amoco, Beatrice, the Pritzkers and the options and futures exchanges, it is no surprise that many of New York's investment banking firms have made it their second city. Analysts say Boston is in third place in investment banking, Los Angeles in fourth. ''Outside of the New York City area, the largest concentration of major companies is within the 300 miles east from Milwaukee through Chicago to Detroit,'' said E. David Coolidge 3d, head of corporate finance at William Blair & Company, the largest Chicago-based investment banking firm. 'Great City' Edgar D. Jannotta, Blair's managing partner, added that Chicago is a ''great city for investment banking'' because it has a stable, broad-based commercial and industrial community. ''We don't have the ups and downs of the oil patch in Texas or the high-tech sector on the West Coast,'' he said. Merrill Lynch & Company has expanded its investment banking presence here to 28 professionals, from 15 in 1985. And First Boston has 22 investment bankers here, up from five in 1982. Kidder, Peabody; Shearson Lehman, Smith Barney and Morgan Stanley have also beefed up their Chicago staffs. What is more, the First National Bank of Chicago, the city's largest bank, is making a major effort to attract investment banking business, doing interest rate swaps, Eurobond offerings and even some merger and acquisition work. In addition, New York's commercial banking giants, such like Citicorp, are trying to grab a piece of the Middle West's investment banking pie. ''Geographic proximity enables you to get to your clients and prospects better and to gain more knowledge of the local market and industries,'' said Randolph Lyon, head of First Boston's Chicago office. ''It's harder to do that out of New York.'' Mr. Lyon said that in 1982 First Boston made a strategic decision to decentralize its investment banking operation and in doing so, set up its second-largest American office in Chicago. ''We saw some of our competitors had already done this, and we couldn't help but notice that they had been very successful,'' Mr. Lyon added. 'We Had the Lead' Goldman, Sachs & Company has had an investment banking presence in Chicago since 1900. ''Until the 1960's, we had the lead, and everybody else was playing catch-up,'' said James P. Gorter, a senior partner who heads Goldman's Chicago office. Salomon Brothers Inc. started giving Goldman heavy competition in 1969, when it started an investment banking operation in Chicago by hiring J. Ira Harris away from a local firm. Mr. Harris rose to prominence in the 1970's through a flurry of deals, including Beatrice's acquisition of Coca-Cola Bottling of Los Angeles, Loews's purchase of CNA and Esmark's takeover of International Playtex. ''People in the Midwest prefer to be covered locally, as long as the services they receive are equal to what they get by being served out of New York,'' Mr. Harris said. In recent years, everyone has tried to steal business from Goldman and Salomon. They do that by repeatedly calling on companies, learning what their problems are and explaining how different investment banking products can help them. They often suggest Eurobond offerings, initial public offerings, or takeover targets. ''We have an identified prospect list,'' said R. Kimble Brooker, head of Morgan Stanley's Chicago office. ''We make idea-oriented calls with considerable regularity. We also think entertainment is important to develop business and relationships.'' Most corporate officials like this expanded investment banking presence. ''The Chicago presence helps because it gives them a better idea of what we're thinking and what we're trying to accomplish,'' said Jack Greenberg, chief financial officer at the McDonald's Corporation. ''It gives them more opportunity to come to us with ideas. The Chicago people are the funnel of new ideas.'' And James M. Denny, vice president of finance for Sears, Roebuck & Company, noted: ''What corporate financial officers often do is reward innovation of particular investment banks by giving them a certain piece of business.'' 'It's Nice to Know' Another advantage comes when Chicago executives want advice on a pressing problem. ''It's nice to know I can just walk down the street to see my investment banker,'' said Patrick G. Ryan, chief executive of the Combined International Corporation. ''You have to have confidence in the advice and ability of your firm, and that generally stems from mutual understanding of one another. Developing that kind of relationship requires proximity.'' For years, Donald P. Kelly, now the chairman of Beatrice, but formerly Esmark's chairman, had breakfast twice a week with Salomon's Ira Harris to kick around ideas. One day, Mr. Kelly said he was interested in buying a consumer products company, and Mr. Harris soon arranged for Mr. Kelly's company to buy International Playtex. This fall, Mr. Harris informed Mr. Kelly that Borden Inc. was interested in Beatrice's dairy division, which made Hotel Bar butter and Meadow Gold ice cream. ''I had originally taken the position that I didn't want to sell it,'' Mr. Kelly said. But he said advice from his longtime investment banker, Mr. Harris, had persuaded him to take the offer seriously - and in November, he sold Beatrice's dairy division to Borden for $315 million. ''Ira had the resources to do the deal without a lot of strain,'' Mr. Kelly said. Salomon Brothers, Morgan Stanley and several other firms execute many of their deals in Chicago. The Morgan Stanley office executes its securities issues and private placements, but leaves most merger and acquisition execution for New York to do. ''The advantage of having people execute on site is it makes them better bankers when the next relationship comes,'' said Morgan's Mr. Brooker. ''But on the M. & A. side, it is such a fast-moving game that there is a lot of merit to having it centralized in one place.'' Goldman's New York Specialists In contrast, Goldman executes all its deals in New York. ''By its nature, a regional office has to be smaller, and the people have to be generalists,'' said Mr. Gorter of Goldman. ''If you had specialists to execute, they might have to call in New York specialists anyway. And specialists could get out of the flow in regional offices - they wouldn't be talking with their peers all the time about the latest ideas.'' The mushrooming number of investment bankers in Chicago has caused some talk of a shakeout, especially amid predictions that merger activity will slow. ''The hot investment banking business in Chicago has been the restructuring of Midwestern industrial companies, but we're at the tail end of that,'' said First Chicago's Mr. Caronia. ''Longer term, I think the big business will be financings.'' As competition has intensified, many companies have begun pursuing niches, such as utilities, transportation or medium-sized companies. ''It's definitely more competitive than it was,'' said Mr. Jannotta of William Blair. ''Whereas we once competed with Chicago firms, many of which have fallen by the wayside, now we're competing against a strong presence from New York.''  A GROWING BUSINESS IN CHICAGO  Number of investment banking professionals employed in Chicago by major firms. Firm 1986 1980 Merrill Lynch Capital Markets 28 9 Kidder, Peabody & Co. 22 9 First Boston Corp. 18 5 William Blair & Co. 18 8 Dean Witter Reynolds 14 6 Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. 13 10 Salomon Brothers 13 10 Prudential-Bache Securities 12 6* Shearson Lehman Brothers 11 6** Chicago Corp. 10 n.a. Morgan Stanley & Co. 9 3 Bear, Stearns & Co. 8 0 Robert E. Lend Co. 8 n.a. Mesirow Financial Corp. 7 n.a. Goldman, Sachs & Co. 7 8 Stifel Nicolaus & Co. 7 n.a. *At predecessor firm Bache Halsey Stuart Shields.n.a. Not applicable.  **At predecessor firm Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb.  (Source: Crain's Chicago Business)
