609|1987\01\03|JAZZ: HERBIE HANCOCK LEADS ALL-STAR QUARTET|Herbie Hancock has played enough different musical roles over the last two decades to suggest to some that he has forsaken the straight and narrow path of jazz for a lucrative career as a gifted journeyman.|Herbie Hancock has played enough different musical roles over the last two decades to suggest to some that he has forsaken the straight and narrow path of jazz for a lucrative career as a gifted journeyman. Herbie Hancock has played enough different musical roles over the last two decades to suggest to some that he has forsaken the straight and narrow path of jazz for a lucrative career as a gifted journeyman. But as Mr. Hancock's haunting contributions as performer and arranger for the movie ''Round Midnight'' have shown, he remains one of the supreme lyricists of the modern jazz keyboard. And even in the world of commercial pop-funk music, his recent electronic ''hip-hop'' records have demonstrated a textural ingenuity, wit and rhythmic bite that surpass the normal run of dance music. During Mr. Hancock's club engagement this past week at the Blue Note (131 West Third Street), where he led an all-star quartet, one was reminded once again of his sweeping keyboard mastery. For this rare club appearance, Mr. Hancock was joined by Branford Marsalis on tenor saxophone, Ron Carter on bass and Al Foster on drums. Mr. Marsalis, who recently worked with Sting and put out an album of light classical music, is a sympathetic partner for Mr. Hancock, since they share a freewheeling jazz eclecticism that scrutinizes songs from a perspective that scrambles styles as it takes a long view of jazz history. Mr. Hancock's evenhanded keyboard dynamics are well matched by Mr. Marsalis's very smooth but precise intonation and fondness for long instrumental lines. Thursday's early show opened with a ''Limehouse Blues'' propelled by popping polyrhythms shared by the sax, bass and drums. Mr. Carter's Brazilian-flavored ''Loose Change,'' which followed, began as a bossa nova bass solo that Mr. Marsalis heated up with clear, trilling solos and Mr. Hancock cooled by gently strumming the piano strings. The quartet's ''Old Devil Moon'' became a churning cycle of interlocking solos, highlighted by Mr. Marsalis's forceful tweedling embellishments. Ken Dorham's ''Fair Weather,'' from the score of ''Round Midnight,'' became the set's cool reflective resting point. ''Just One of Those Things,'' a genially upbeat display of Latin fireworks, concluded a multistyled, continuously absorbing musical encounter.
