61|1987\01\01|JAZZ: GREY AND TATE|The trombonist Al Grey and the saxophonist Buddy Tate, both seasoned veterans of many years with the Count Basie orchestra, are constantly on the road now, either together or singly. They travel the world, picking up local rhythm sections to play with them.|The trombonist Al Grey and the saxophonist Buddy Tate, both seasoned veterans of many years with the Count Basie orchestra, are constantly on the road now, either together or singly. They travel the world, picking up local rhythm sections to play with them. The trombonist Al Grey and the saxophonist Buddy Tate, both seasoned veterans of many years with the Count Basie orchestra, are constantly on the road now, either together or singly. They travel the world, picking up local rhythm sections to play with them. This week Mr. Tate and Mr. Grey are home for the holidays at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, between 11th and Perry Streets, through Sunday, with a superb ''local'' rhythm section made up of musicians as widely traveled as they - Sir Roland Hanna on piano, Major Holley on bass and the drummer Bobby Durham, on leave from Ella Fitzgerald. Despite the Basie backgrounds of Mr. Tate and Mr. Grey, there is almost as much of Duke Ellington in their style and repertory as there is of Basie. This comes not only from Mr. Grey's Ellingtonian growling with a plunger mute, or Mr. Tate's swaggering sweep, but also from Mr. Hanna, who, in this group, becomes a straight-ahead swinger rather than the more complex and innovative pianist he is apt to be in his solo or trio performances. He plays much of the time with a punchy drive that suggests the open, swinging joy of the Basie band, but when the group takes up the Duke's ''C Jam Blues,'' his solo contribution is a railroad blues with spare, ringing Ellington chords. Mr. Tate plays clarinet with increasing frequency these days, using a warm, mellow tone that is particularly effective in the bending, shimmering lines of ''Blue Tate,'' on which Mr. Grey gives a masterful demonstration of the soft, cushioned, distant sound that he can achieve with his normally growling or raucous plunger mute.
