610|1987\01\03|OPERA: ALTMEYER IN 'FIDELIO' AT MET|In recent seasons the Metropolitan Opera has upgraded the quality of its ''cover,'' or substitute, singers, but to have Jeannine Altmeyer, one of our leading Brunhildes and Isoldes, covering for Hildegard Behrens as Leonore in ''Fidelio'' seems downright luxurious. Ms. Altmeyer sang her one scheduled performance of the part Thursday night, although she had actually sung the role for the first time at the Met on Dec.|In recent seasons the Metropolitan Opera has upgraded the quality of its ''cover,'' or substitute, singers, but to have Jeannine Altmeyer, one of our leading Brunhildes and Isoldes, covering for Hildegard Behrens as Leonore in ''Fidelio'' seems downright luxurious. Ms. Altmeyer sang her one scheduled performance of the part Thursday night, although she had actually sung the role for the first time at the Met on Dec. In recent seasons the Metropolitan Opera has upgraded the quality of its ''cover,'' or substitute, singers, but to have Jeannine Altmeyer, one of our leading Brunhildes and Isoldes, covering for Hildegard Behrens as Leonore in ''Fidelio'' seems downright luxurious. Ms. Altmeyer sang her one scheduled performance of the part Thursday night, although she had actually sung the role for the first time at the Met on Dec. 17 when she stepped in for an indisposed Ms. Behrens. Ms. Altmeyer had a stomach virus herself on Thursday, an announcement said. She had a few pitch problems in ''Komm, Hoffnung,'' and struggled a bit at the very top, but perhaps those minor troubles were unrelated to her illness. In any event, Ms. Altmeyer has a pleasing voice, for all its considerable size more softly feminine in tone and inflection than one usually encounters in this opera. And she moves onstage with little effort at masculine impersonation, which looked odd here and there. She also mouths consonants too much: in their second-act duet, her Florestan, Edward Sooter, consistently articulated the word ''Freude'' while Ms. Altmeyer answered with a blast of pure vowel tone. Still, this was a committed, affecting performance by a major singer. The other casting novelty was the Don Fernando of Richard J. Clark, his first at the Met. Mr. Clark sang routinely and looked sillier and more sticklike than most singers of this cardboard character. But the blame must be assigned primarily to Beethoven and secondarily to Mr. Clark's costumer and wigmaker. The rest of the cast offered Marie McLaughlin, Barry McCauley, Matthias Holle and Siegmund Nimsgern, with Richard Woitach conducting.
