614|1987\01\03|TV: PREMIERE OF 'SIGNATURE,' AN A&E INTERVIEW SHOW|''Surprise your eyes!,'' the Arts & Entertainment Cable Network's unfelicitous slogan, seems even sillier than usual when applied to tonight's premiere of ''Signature,'' a species of that notoriously unsurprising television staple, the celebrity interview. Since the show begins at 11:30 P.M., it may shut some eyes.|''Surprise your eyes!,'' the Arts & Entertainment Cable Network's unfelicitous slogan, seems even sillier than usual when applied to tonight's premiere of ''Signature,'' a species of that notoriously unsurprising television staple, the celebrity interview. Since the show begins at 11:30 P.M., it may shut some eyes. ''Surprise your eyes!,'' the Arts & Entertainment Cable Network's unfelicitous slogan, seems even sillier than usual when applied to tonight's premiere of ''Signature,'' a species of that notoriously unsurprising television staple, the celebrity interview. Since the show begins at 11:30 P.M., it may shut some eyes. Tonight's guest is Jack Lemmon, who reflects in the course of his half-hour, ''We go through different plateaus in our life''; reveals his lifelong ambition ''to be the best actor I can be''; laments that Hollywood's star system keeps him from playing small parts, and recalls the declaration of his father, an executive of a large baked-goods concern, ''The day that I don't find romance in a loaf of bread I'm gonna quit.'' What distinguishes ''Signature'' is less the quality of the information it conveys than the method of conveyance. The interviewer, Gregory Jackson, who is also executive producer of the series, can be glimpsed under the opening titles as a shadow. Thereafter, the camera remains on the face of the guest, often moving in for exceedingly tight shots that deprive him of the tip of his chin and his hairline. Even this innovation is unsurprising, since Mr. Jackson has been doing it for years. These shows were made in 1981 and have been seen on other channels. Mr. Lemmon's eyes, nose, lips and sideburns are not painful to watch, and as an interviewer, the invisible Mr. Jackson is a couple of notches above the morning talk-show hosts. He patronizes but does not pander, and sometimes he actually seems to be listening to what his guest says -which is the basic problem with ''Signature.'' It confirms the long-established fact that actors without a script generally don't have all that much to say, and shows like this one compel them to keep saying it. Coming up on subsequent Saturdays are Ed Asner, Jason Robards, Jacqueline Bisset and Mel Torme, to be followed by 110 others. Surprised?
