615|1987\01\03|THE COLLAGE ART OF ROMARE BEARDEN: FRAGMENTED IMAGES OF BLACK LIFE|Romare Bearden, dressed in a Navy mechanic's jump suit and knit cap, is not a pretentious painter, despite the fact that his collage paintings, which capture in snatches of photographs and colored paper pieces of American life, are known throughout the world.|Romare Bearden, dressed in a Navy mechanic's jump suit and knit cap, is not a pretentious painter, despite the fact that his collage paintings, which capture in snatches of photographs and colored paper pieces of American life, are known throughout the world. Romare Bearden, dressed in a Navy mechanic's jump suit and knit cap, is not a pretentious painter, despite the fact that his collage paintings, which capture in snatches of photographs and colored paper pieces of American life, are known throughout the world. Fifty-five of Mr. Bearden's semiabstract works, including his earlier Cubist compositions and his later collages, are on display at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street. The exhibition, which continues through March 1, is titled ''Origins and Progressions.'' A videotape documentary about Mr. Bearden's life, ''Bearden Plays Bearden,'' accompanies the exhibition, which is sponsored by the Founder's Society of the Detroit Institute of Arts. ''You don't paint what you see, you paint what you feel,'' Mr. Bearden said recently in an interview at his Canal Street apartment in Lower Manhattan. He was speaking of his collage paintings in which fragmented images of conjure women, birds, railroads, factories and Harlem musicians reappear. These are the themes, he said, that make up the tapestry of black urban and rural life. ''Trains are so much a part of Afro-American life, both in myth and in legend,'' the 74-year-old artist said, commenting on the predominance of trains in one collage, ''The Baptism'' (circa 1964). The inspiration for this particular compostion, he said, came from his years growing up in Mecklenburg County in North Carolina. ''A lot of poor black people worked on the railroads and they lived near the tracks. Trains can either take you there or take you away.'' Collage and Cubism Mr. Bearden uses neon greens and yellows in juxtaposition with disparate textures - cloth, paint, paper, photograph - to create vivid scenes and landscapes that appear to jump from the page. These are collages, and yet the artist feels he is part of the Cubist discipline. ''I feel that I am a flat painter, a Cubist painter,'' Mr. Bearden said. ''I like the tradition of flat painting that you see in China, Persia and revived again in Japan.'' Until Picasso's 1912 collage ''Still Life With Chair Caning,'' collage was not formally accepted as an art movement. The origins of collage date back further, to 12th-century Japan, 13th-century Persia and 17th-century Europe. Collage is now considered an assimilation of several different movements: Surrealism, Dadaism and Cubism. In another collage, ''Suzannah at the Bath,'' a woman bather dresses. Mr. Bearden said, ''A lot of the Old Masters like Rembrandt did this, using the ritual of bathing as a cleansing thing.'' Mr. Bearden received his only formal training during a year at the Art Student's League. ''Afterward, I copied Rembrandt and some of the other masters for about two to three years on big sheets of brown paper,'' he said. Many of the collages at the Bronx Museum, such as ''Homer's Iliad,'' the 1948 colored pencil-and-ink trilogy, suggest the influence of some of the masters - Duccio, Giotto and Rembrandt. In ''One for the Trojans,'' the proportionate layering of figures, suggesting a duplicity of movement, implies Cubism. But the deep, rich blues, yellows and purples that Mr. Bearden uses to fuse these paintings suggest the improvisational freedom equated with collage. American Tradition Mr. Bearden, who has won many awards and citations, believes his craft is one part of a greater whole, making up America's literary and artistic tradition. ''I think of myself first as an American,'' Mr. Bearden said. ''And being an American means four things. One, being in the tradition of Emerson, Emily Dickinson, Melville, Walt Whitman. Second, you have to have the spirit of the whole Negroid tradition. The third tradition is the frontiersman, like Mark Twain and Bret Harte, and the fourth tradition is the Indian.'' Mr. Bearden does not give himself a rating in the hierarchy of art. ''I just do what I do,'' he said.
