616|1987\01\03|TV: TRUE MURDER STORY IN 'AT MOTHER'S REQUEST'|Almost as bizarre as the murder story itself are the various efforts to package the tale for public consumption. The Utah trial of Frances Schreuder, convicted of forcing her son to kill her father, brought forth not one but two best-selling books: Shana Alexander's ''Nutcracker: Money, Madness, Murder - A Family Album'' and Jonathan Coleman's ''At Mother's Request.|Almost as bizarre as the murder story itself are the various efforts to package the tale for public consumption. The Utah trial of Frances Schreuder, convicted of forcing her son to kill her father, brought forth not one but two best-selling books: Shana Alexander's ''Nutcracker: Money, Madness, Murder - A Family Album'' and Jonathan Coleman's ''At Mother's Request. Almost as bizarre as the murder story itself are the various efforts to package the tale for public consumption. The Utah trial of Frances Schreuder, convicted of forcing her son to kill her father, brought forth not one but two best-selling books: Shana Alexander's ''Nutcracker: Money, Madness, Murder - A Family Album'' and Jonathan Coleman's ''At Mother's Request.'' Commercial television, ever eager for a bit of sensationalism, then decided to dramatize not one but both of the books. ''Nutcracker,'' starring Lee Remick, will be presented as a six-hour mini-series on NBC later this season. ''At Mother's Request,'' starring Stephanie Powers and running for a mere four hours, is being unveiled on CBS tomorrow and Tuesday at 9 P.M. Directed by Michael Tuchner for the Vista Organization Ltd., ''At Mother's Request'' was adapted for television by Richard DeLong Adams, who has untangled the twisting strands of the story well enough to deliver a clear, chronological script. The scenario keeps shifting from Salt Lake City, where the 1977 murder of Franklin Bradshaw took place, to New York City's fashionable East Side, where his daughter Frances lived with her three children. Mr. Adams gets the facts right, but the ''lesson'' that's evidently intended remains obscure. Played with chilling intensity by Ms. Powers, Frances Schreuder is a woman teetering on the edge of madness. Having gone through two marriages, she is now torturing her children, bestowing and then taking away her affections as her sadistic whims dictate. The goal is total control. Larry (Corey Parker), the eldest, is often forced to sleep on the street when mama decides he has been bad. Mark (Doug McKeon) rushes to light her cigarettes and do anything that might please her. Even tiny Ashley (Jenna von Oy), a student at the School of American Ballet, can sometimes become a target of mother's completely irrational fury. Frances despises her mother but her almost pure hate is reserved for her father (E. G. Marshall), a multimillionaire whose tightfisted ways infuriate her. Living in near poverty, despite her New York address and her prominence as a benefactor of the New York City Ballet, Frances is determined to have her inheritance, and the plot to murder her father is hatched. It is eventually solved only because Frances antagonizes a cohort, the seedy snob Richard Behrens (John Wood), in a silly argument involving a few thousand dollars. The spurned ''Uncle Dickie'' decides to go to the police in return for his own immunity from prosecution. Frances and her son Mark are now serving time in Utah State Prison. In merely trying to keep the story straight, in explaining who did what and when or where it happened, ''At Mother's Request'' tends to keep a distance from motivations and psychological explorations. We learn that Frances has always felt unloved and is determined to make everybody else feel the same way. We find out that very few poeple have ever been able to say never to Frances. We watch her mother, Berenice, being a gullible fool when it comes to dealing with her strange daughter. But none of this explains the pervasive viciousness that will eventually lead to family murder. Part of the story's fascination, of course, is in how it rips the veil from seemingly ''respectable'' society. This is, at bottom, a retort to the warm, loving family portraits favored by Norman Rockwell or Ronald Reagan. Here was a wealthy, hard-working Salt Lake City family, a pillar of the Mormon community. Here was a former Bryn Mawr woman, a patron of the arts in New York's supposedly sophisticated world. The surface images of success are reassuring. Just beneath is almost unrelieved horror. In refusing to draw hard conclusions, ''At Mother's Request'' ends up as a curiosity, intriguing but pointless. Press material for the film includes a jail interview by two network officials with Mark Schreuder, who still shows little apparent regret for shooting his grandfather in the back and then finishing him off with a bullet in the head. ''It's sort of like a classical Shakespearean tragedy,'' he ventures. Looking forward to a possible parole in 1994, Mark is working with computers and keeping up with the stock and commodities markets. His tip for the future: ''Buy platinum.'' The anecdote may be more revealing about contemporary values than the entire movie.
