618|1987\01\04|NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Rockford, Ill.; A State Project Aids Comeback|AFTER several years of decline, a turnaround is building momentum in the center of Illinois's second-largest city. Commitments for improvements and construction projects total more than $40 million in an area recently plagued by store vacancies and a declining commercial and retail base.|AFTER several years of decline, a turnaround is building momentum in the center of Illinois's second-largest city. Commitments for improvements and construction projects total more than $40 million in an area recently plagued by store vacancies and a declining commercial and retail base. AFTER several years of decline, a turnaround is building momentum in the center of Illinois's second-largest city. Commitments for improvements and construction projects total more than $40 million in an area recently plagued by store vacancies and a declining commercial and retail base. The biggest boost to the city's recent rejuvenation - state backing for the development of a 10-story regional state office building - was confirmed late last year by Gov. James R. Thompson. A site and a plan for the $10 million complex on the Rock River are set, with construction to begin this spring. As envisioned, the 90,000-square-foot building will house a crime lab and conference center and accommodate other state offices now scattered throughout the city. Governor Thompson also plans to keep an office there as part of his promise to turn Rockford into a major center of state government along with Chicago and Springfield, the capital. A $16 million, 210-room luxury hotel and a $2 million, 400-car parking deck are also planned. Four blocks away, Federal and city funds are being used to raze several dilapidated buildings and convert an entire square block into a $4.6 million terminal for regional and city buses. It is expected to be completed late this year. When larger department stores like J. C. Penney moved in 1979 from the downtown area to a regional shopping center at the city's edge, a two-block pedestrian mall was put in place to draw people to the city center and combat store closings. It failed, and store vacancies soon exceeded 50 percent. At the same time, Rockford was hit by layoffs from employers such as Chrysler and the Ingersoll Milling Machine Company, a tool-and-die maker. In 1982, the city's unemployment rate was 20 percent. Businessmen and real-estate investors said the mall had to be removed if there was to be hope for the downtown area. ''The mall became a symbol of despair,'' said Charles L. Durham, Rockford's economic development coordinator. Consequently, when the mall was reopened to traffic in 1985, it was seen as a turning point, and other steps followed. To attract evening visitors, the city bought a vacant local department store in 1985 and spent close to $1 million to convert it into a 250-seat theater, with offices and rehearsal areas, for the New American Theater. A private developer bought the vacant J. C. Penney store last year and plans to renovate it into a $4.5 million office-retail complex by mid-1987. City officials admit that the downtown area cannot compete with shopping-center developments and will never again be a major retail center. Instead, service-oriented businesses are focusing on Rockford's role as a county seat and as an expanded center of government services.
