619|1987\01\04|NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Los Angeles; Seventh Street Coming Alive|WHEN the first floor of J. W. Robinson's department store in downtown Los Angeles was reopened last month after extensive reconstruction, nobody missed the significance of still another sign of commercial rebirth along a six-block stretch of Seventh Street between Figueroa and Broadway, once known as the ''mecca for merchants.|WHEN the first floor of J. W. Robinson's department store in downtown Los Angeles was reopened last month after extensive reconstruction, nobody missed the significance of still another sign of commercial rebirth along a six-block stretch of Seventh Street between Figueroa and Broadway, once known as the ''mecca for merchants. WHEN the first floor of J. W. Robinson's department store in downtown Los Angeles was reopened last month after extensive reconstruction, nobody missed the significance of still another sign of commercial rebirth along a six-block stretch of Seventh Street between Figueroa and Broadway, once known as the ''mecca for merchants.'' In its heyday in the 20's, it was home to some of southern California's largest and most elegant department stores, an impressive array of imposing stone and steel buildings, in a mix of Romanesque, Gothic and commercial architectural styles. But by the late 60's, freeways leading to suburban malls had sucked most of the business off Seventh Street, which then fell prey to inconvenience, vagrancy and filth. By most accounts, the area hit bottom in 1972, when it looked like the retail equivalent of an elephant's burial ground. Planners and brokers say a corner was turned in 1973, when the Broadway, a major local retailer, moved its downtown store into a newly built complex containing offices, shops and a Hyatt Hotel. Rising suburban land prices had made downtown property attractive again, and office towers were rising nearby. Projects now under way include a $25 million rehabilitation of a Hilton Hotel at one corner of Seventh and Figueroa, construction of a 22-story Home Savings office tower at a second corner and the planned expansion of the Citicorp Plaza complex of offices and retail outlets on a third corner. Multimillion-dollar rehabilitation projects have restored the luster to several of the street's older office buildings, according to officials at the city's Community Redevelopment Agency. Seventh Street is scheduled to be a major stop on the Metro Rail system, and in the last few years several upscale specialty shops have moved into the area. The effect of all these changes is not yet clear, since much of what has been added is either brand-new or still under construction. In general, however, analysts say the jury remains out, judging from uneven leasing activity and equally uneven sales figures. Some say the recovery here may yet be sidetracked by a downtown glut in office space, or continued suburban competition. Still the renaissance at Robinson's - undertaken at an undisclosed cost -has a nice symbolic edge to it. Marble and granite floors, barrel-vaulted aisles and canopied glass pavilions have restored much of the store's faded sense of elegance. As a result, the store is once again among the most attractive members of its 25-member southern California chain. ''I think it means a lot to people who have been around Los Angeles for a long time'' to see the store refurbished, said Donald Spivak, a spokesman for the Community Redevelopment Agency. ''I think it says we're starting to come back.''
