620|1987\01\04|'BAGEL BOOM' SPURS LIVELY COMPETITION|SIXTY years ago Harry Lender left Lubin, Poland, and came to West Haven. Almost immediately, the immigrant opened a bagel bakery in front of his house.|SIXTY years ago Harry Lender left Lubin, Poland, and came to West Haven. Almost immediately, the immigrant opened a bagel bakery in front of his house. SIXTY years ago Harry Lender left Lubin, Poland, and came to West Haven. Almost immediately, the immigrant opened a bagel bakery in front of his house. In 1978 his sons, heading what had turned into a multi-million dollar frozen bagel distribution business, H. Lender and Sons, opened a bagel restaurant in Orange. Two years later they opened a second one in Hamden. But the Lenders are not the only bagel merchants in the region; in fact, a bagel rivalry seems to be in the works. Three years ago Harry Lengel, who owned a Dunkin' Donut franchise, took over a closed International House of Pancakes restaurant on one of New Haven's busiest streets and with his sons converted it into the Bagel Connection, a bakery and restaurant. Now the two families are taking their businesses one step further: Both want to open a chain of franchised bagel restaurants. ''Bagels are a great growth market,'' said Fred Montgomery, president of the Lender brothers' new company, S. Kinder Restaurants Inc., which is based in Woodbridge. ''It appears younger people are getting on to bagels as a more delicious thing that's healthy and economical.'' Bagels are in great demand, Mr. Lengel added, ''because of the health craze. Look around our shop and you'll never see any grease.'' In 1984 Kraft bought Lender's Frozen Bagel Manufacturing Company, which had sales of about $60 million, but the family kept its two restaurants. One of the conditions of the sale, however, was that the name of the restaurants be changed, Mr. Montgomery said. The name S. Kinder is derived from the Yiddish expression meaning ''eat, children,'' he said. The company will open five restaurants next year, Mr. Montgomery said; three in Fairfield and Hartford Counties, one in Manhattan and one in Westville, across the street from its competition, the Bagel Connection. The company hopes to open franchises, as well, he said. Meanwhile, another company-owned Bagel Connection is being built in downtown New Haven, Mr. Lengel said, adding that he was also working with about 20 people who want to start franchises. The franchises should open next year in Fairfield and Hartford Counties, New York and New Jersey, he said. ''Competition is good,'' said Marvin Lender, vice chairman of S. Kinder. ''We've been in the middle of a bagel boom for years and years and years and there's no end in sight. The more bagel activity there is, the more bagel awareness.'' ''We're being swallowed up by a Goliath,'' Mr. Lengel said of the Lender brothers' company. ''Actually, we're not really competitive. They freeze their bagels and we would never do that in a million years.'' Murray Lender, chairman of S. Kinder, said the company does use frozen dough, made at its plant in New Haven, but that the bagels are then boiled and baked at the restaurants. ''Everyone else uses a plain bagel and throws stuff on top,'' he pointed out. ''We put our sesame seeds, onions and garlic throughout the bagel.'' The families share many similarities, including fathers named Harry, a tradition as bakers, two sons who help with the family business and the closeness of their names, Lender and Lengel. But their restaurants are in sharp contrast. The Bagel Connection is designed similar to a cafeteria, with a tile floor and about a dozen tables. It offers 20 varieties of bagels at 25 cents each; its newest creation is a spinach bagel. The company's new location in downtown New Haven will be larger than its present site and will have a more contemporary design in earth tones, said Mr. Lengel's son, Gary. The decor at S. Kinder, which bakes 17 varieties of bagels that sell for 30 cents each, tries to capture the feel of the neighborhood that the Lender brothers grew up in, said Joseph Tendler, director of communications for S. Kinder. The restaurants have about 40 tables. Old street, bakery and movie theater signs adorn the walls. There is a showcase with large jars of jelly beans, gum-ball machines and an old cash register. The S. Kinder restaurants, which have waiter service, pride themselves also on their salads and freshly squeezed orange juice. Both companies indicated that their goal is to have a nationwide chain of restaurants. They said there are roughly 30 independent bagel shops in the state, but no other chains. ''Our family has never done anything but bagels and it's important it stays that way,'' said Murray Lender. His brother Marvin added, ''It's exciting to take a backyard business and turn it into a national business.'' Jo O'Neil of Hamden, who is a customer of both restaurants, said she did not think the Bagel Connection will be competition for S. Kinder because the latter restaurant is ''really well known.'' ''If you're going to the restaurant in Orange for Sunday brunch you can't get a seat,'' she said. ''Everybody and their uncle goes to Lender's.'' ''Everybody hears about them,'' Mr. Lengel said of the Lender brothers, ''and we have a better, bigger, cheaper and tastier bagel.'' Murray Lender countered: ''I think our bagel is the best bagel in America, but on the other hand, I've never eaten a bad bagel.''
