621|1987\01\04|REVISING A RECIPE FOR VARIED INGREDIENTS|KNOWING how to vary a recipe, to take off on one's own from what is printed on the page, makes for inventive cooking. Some recipes are especially suited to revising. Here's a case in point.|KNOWING how to vary a recipe, to take off on one's own from what is printed on the page, makes for inventive cooking. Some recipes are especially suited to revising. Here's a case in point. KNOWING how to vary a recipe, to take off on one's own from what is printed on the page, makes for inventive cooking. Some recipes are especially suited to revising. Here's a case in point. Start with chicken cutlets, the boned and skinned breast halves that are sold in supermarkets. (Or you can start with whole breasts and bone and skin your own.) The recipe that calls for stuffing them, then cooking them in sauce can be varied almost infinitely. A spinach stuffing seasoned with cheese and walnuts, with a red wine sauce spiked with balsamic vinegar, is one approach. Mushroom duxelles, a fine puree of mushrooms and shallots enriched with a little cream, makes a different dish, this time the sauce based on dry Marsala wine and smoothed wih some cream.Smoked mozzarella bound with rice provides yet another taste for the stuffing, its sauce made with tomatoes and white wine. Each of these recipes is cooked in about the same manner; the set of stuffing ingredients and sauce flavorings have changed. Try a few variations on your own. A filling of pesto and bread crumbs with a light tomato sauce might be one idea. Cooked wild rice and shallots bound with a bit of cream in a sherry-and-cream sauce is another. Finely minced ginger, scallions, garlic, Smithfield ham and water chestnuts for a filling, with a sauce of chicken stock and dry sherry, gives the dish a Chinese character, especially if the chicken rolls are dusted lightly with water chestnut flour or cornstarch instead of wheat flour. Chicken Breasts Stuffed with Spinach  1 pound fresh spinach or a 10-ounce package of frozen.  2 tablespoons butter  2 tablespoons finely minced shallots  1 clove garlic, minced 1/2 teaspoon dried sage  2 tablespoons walnuts  2 tablespoons freshly grated Italian Parmesan cheese Salt and freshly ground pepper  8 small boned and skinned chicken breasts, about 2 1/2 ounces each, pounded thin.  4 tablespoons flour  2 tablespoons olive oil  1 cup dry red wine  2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 1. Trim the spinach of any coarse stems, wash it very well and chop it. If using frozen spinach, defrost it. Heat butter in a large skillet. Add one tablespoons of the shallots and the garlic and saute over medium low heat until tender. Add the fresh or frozen spinach and cook until the spinach is completely wilted and any excess liquid evaporated from the pan. 2. Transfer spinach to a food processor; add sage, walnuts and cheese and process to a fine puree. Season to taste with salt and pepper. 3. Spread about a tablespoon of this mixture on each flattened chicken breast, roll the chicken around the filling and secure with toothpicks or tie with butcher's cord. Dust each roll lightly with flour. 4. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet. Add the chicken and saute quickly over medium high heat until golden brown on all sides. Remove chicken from the pan, add the remaining tablespoon of shallots and saute briefly. Stir in the red wine. 5. Return the chicken to the pan, baste with the sauce, cover and cook over low heat for 35 minutes, basting once or twice more. 6. Remove chicken from the pan and transfer to a serving dish. Cover and keep warm. 7. Add the vinegar to the pan, stir, then taste for seasoning. Heat briefly and then spoon sauce over chicken and serve. Yield: 4 servings. Chicken Breasts Stuffed with Mushrooms  1 pound fresh mushrooms, chopped  2 tablespoons butter  3 tablespoons finely minced shallots  1 clove garlic, minced  2 tablespoons chopped parsley  3 tablespoons heavy cream Salt and freshly ground black pepper  8 small boned and skinned chicken breasts, about 2 1/2 ounces each, pounded thin.  4 tablespoons flour  2 tablespoons olive oil  1 cup dry Marsala wine 1. Place mushrooms in a food processor and process until finely chopped. Transfer mushrooms to a sieve and press out any excess liquid. 2. Heat butter in a large skillet. Add 2 tablespoons of the shallots and the garlic and saute over medium-low heat until tender. Add the chopped drained mushrooms and cook until they are lightly browned and any excess liquid has evaporated from the pan. 3. Return mushrooms to a food processor, add parsley and one tablespoon of the cream and process to a fine puree. Season to taste with salt and pepper. 4. Spread about a tablespoon of this mixture on each flattened chicken breast, roll the chicken around the filling and secure with toothpicks or tie with butcher's cord. Dust each roll lightly with flour. 5. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet. Add the chicken and saute quickly over medium high heat until golden brown on all sides. Remove chicken from pan, add the remaining tablespoon of shallots and saute briefly. Stir in the Marsala. 6. Return the chicken to the pan, baste with the sauce, cover and cook over low heat for 35 minutes, basting once or twice. 7. Remove chicken from the pan and transfer to a serving dish. Cover to keep warm. 8. Add the remaining cream to the pan, stir, then taste for seasoning. Cook briefly over high heat then spoon sauce over chicken and serve. Yield: 4 servings. Chicken Breasts With Smoked Mozzarella  4 tablespoons shredded smoked mozzarella 1/2 cup cooked rice Salt and freshly ground black pepper  8 small boned and skinned chicken breasts, about 2 1/2 ounces each, pounded thin.  4 tablespoons flour  2 tablespoons olive oil  3 tablespoons minced shallots  1 large clove garlic, minced 1/2 cup dry white wine 1/2 cup finely chopped or pureed fresh or canned tomatoes.  1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley 1. Mix mozzarella and rice together. Season lightly with salt and pepper. 2. Spread a thin layer of this mixture on each chicken breast, roll around the filling and secure with toothpicks or tie with butcher's cord. Dust each roll lightly with flour. 3. Heat olive oil in a large skillet. Add the chicken and saute over medium high heat until golden brown on all sides. 4.Remove chicken from the pan, add shallots and garlic and saute briefly. Stir in wine and tomatoes. 5. Return chicken to the pan, baste with the sauce, cover and cook over low heat for 35 minutes, basting once or twice. 6. Remove chicken from the pan and transfer to a serving dish. Cover to keep warm. Heat sauce, stir well and season with salt and pepper. Spoon sauce over chicken, dust with parsley and serve. Yield: 4 servings. FOOD
