626|1987\01\04|PROPERLY CUT MOLDINGS CAN PROVIDE A DECORATIVE TOUCH|WOOD moldings have so many uses, both decorative and practical, that few woodworking or carpentry projects can be satisfactorily completed without them.|WOOD moldings have so many uses, both decorative and practical, that few woodworking or carpentry projects can be satisfactorily completed without them. WOOD moldings have so many uses, both decorative and practical, that few woodworking or carpentry projects can be satisfactorily completed without them. In most cases moldings add a finishing touch to a job - for example, to trim around the edges of a door or window frame, or to conceal gaps on inside or outside corners after wood wall paneling has been installed. Moldings can also be used to dress up a simple flush door by gluing strips to the surface to create a paneled effect. The same thing can be done on a flat painted wall. Or they can be used to add a decorative touch to otherwise plain surfaces or woodworking projects. A simple plywood box, for instance, can be ''dressed up'' to look like a skillfully hand-crafted chest or cabinet by simply adding moldings on the corners, and perhaps some moldings that form a design on the sides or top of the box. Two or even three different styles of molding can be combined to create a single, more elaborate-looking molding, or to create the effect of a heavy frame around a large poster or wall-mounted decoration of any kind. In addition to these purely decorative uses, moldings also have many practical uses around the home, such as covering up joints or seams that are less than perfect and helping to make joints more waterproof, especially around the outside. Regardless of how molding is used, its final appearance will be determined by how neat a job the handyman does in fitting and joining the individual pieces. Neatly fitted joints that have no unsightly gaps or ragged edges will give the project a finished, professional look, while poorly fitted joints that have unsightly gaps or ragged edges will give the whole job an amateurish and sloppy appearance. To insure snug-fitting joints, it is essential that moldings be accurately cut off at the proper angle, and that cuts be clean and smooth with no splintering. To accomplish this, a sharp, fine-toothed saw should be used, such as a backsaw or dovetail saw; even a hacksaw fitted with a coarse blade will work fine. Mitering is the technique most often used to join two pieces of molding that meet at right angles, especially on outside corners. Each piece is cut off at a 45-degree angle so that the two ends will form a 90-degree angle. For accurate cutting, a miter box will be needed to guide the saw and to hold the molding steady while the cut is being made. An inexpensive or homemade one similar to the one illustrated here is more than adequate. There are also more elaborate models you can buy that are made of metal and will permit adjusting for all angles. Normally made of wood, these U-shaped miter boxes have one set of slots to guide the saw when cuts are to be made at a 90-degree angle, and another set of slots to guide the blade when cuts are to be made at a 45-degree angle. The molding to be cut is placed on the bottom of the box so that its back edge -the edge that will go against the wall or other surface - is against the back wall of the box. It should be in the same position as it will be when installed. A cove molding, for example, which normally fits into the corner between a wall and ceiling at about a 45-degree angle, should be held inside the box at the same angle. For the actual cutting, a backsaw - a special saw similar to the one shown here - is the best type of saw to use. It has a stiff metal spine along the top of the blade to insure a straight cut, and has its handle set at a more suitable angle for use with a miter box. An ordinary carpenter's saw can also be used, but it must be sharp and the finer the teeth the better. Even then, it will not give as clean a cut as a backsaw or a dovetail saw (a smaller version of a backsaw with finer teeth). One problem with installing moldings on an outside corner - such as where two walls meet - is that the corner joint formed by the walls is not always exactly 90 degrees. One way to compensate for this is to cut the molding off at an angle that is slightly more or slightly less than 45 degrees after some trial fitting with scrap pieces, and possibly some sanding or filing to insure a perfect fit. Another way is to install the moldings as is -with mitered ends at a 45-degree angle -then fill in any gaps that remain by using a spackling compound or wood plastic. In dealing with inside corners, the same problem often occurs. So a different technique, known as coping, is used by most professional carpenters. Even when the corner does form a 90-degree angle, it is often difficult and time-consuming to achieve a really accurate fit, because even the slightest gap will be noticeable when viewed from above. With a neatly coped joint there is seldom if ever a gap visible. And when you are not dealing with an accurate corner angle, coping solves the problem of determining the correct angle; when properly done, it almost insures a neat-looking corner joint. Coping is done by first cutting off the end of one piece at a straight 90-degree angle, then nailing this piece in place against one of the walls with its square end butted straight into the corner as shown. The end of the second piece is then cut off with a coping saw - a fine-toothed jigsaw that is designed for cutting intricate curves - so that its cut end matches the profile on the front of the molding when it is pushed against the face of the piece that is already in place, as shown here. With a simple shape like the one illustrated here, you can use a scrap piece of the molding to trace its profile onto the back of the piece to be coped. Then follow this outline, on the back, with your coping saw as you carefully trim off the end to match this profile. This technique works only with moldings that have a flat backside and a fairly simple shape. The method that most carpenters prefer, and the one that will work with any molding, regardless of shape, is to first use a miter box to cut off the end of the second piece at a 45-degree angle, just as though it were being mitered. You will then notice that the inside edge of this cut, the edge that is along the carved face, clearly outlines the face of the molding, so all you have to do is cut the end off a second time with the coping saw. Only this time you cut it off at a 90-degree angle while following the outline of the molding's face so as to reproduce its profile on the end of the piece. You can now push this into the corner with the curved or cut-out end directly up against the face of the previously installed piece on the other wall. When a single length of molding is not long enough for the job, so that two pieces have to be joined end to end, most handymen will simply butt the ends together. However, this creates a joint that is often quite visible, and one that will be prone to opening up periodically as the wood shrinks. A much neater and less noticeable joint that will not be affected by expansion and contraction of the wood can be made by using a technique known as scarfing. Each piece is cut off at a 45-degree angle, as shown here, then the two angled ends are overlapped, as illustrated, before being nailed in place. For best results the nails should be slanted toward the piece underneath so that they go off at an angle that will more deeply penetrate the second piece, rather than going straight through into the wall behind the two. Questions about home repair should be addressed to Bernard Gladstone, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. Questions of general interest will be answered in this column; unpublished letters cannot be answered individually. HOME CLINIC
