627|1987\01\04|SERGE LIFAR - AN UNFORGETTABLE STAR|When Serge Lifar was first introduced to the dancers in the Paris Opera Ballet in 1929, their attitude toward the new Russian guest star from Diaghilev's recently disbanded Ballets Russes was decidedly hostile. Within a few hours of rehearsal, however, their future director already felt at home. Looking back later upon his relationship with the company, Lifar saw himself as ''a sort of happy shepherd.|When Serge Lifar was first introduced to the dancers in the Paris Opera Ballet in 1929, their attitude toward the new Russian guest star from Diaghilev's recently disbanded Ballets Russes was decidedly hostile. Within a few hours of rehearsal, however, their future director already felt at home. Looking back later upon his relationship with the company, Lifar saw himself as ''a sort of happy shepherd. When Serge Lifar was first introduced to the dancers in the Paris Opera Ballet in 1929, their attitude toward the new Russian guest star from Diaghilev's recently disbanded Ballets Russes was decidedly hostile. Within a few hours of rehearsal, however, their future director already felt at home. Looking back later upon his relationship with the company, Lifar saw himself as ''a sort of happy shepherd.'' Lifar's flock, in fact, remained unusually loyal during the nearly 30 years he reigned as head of the Paris Opera Ballet. A controversial figure whose self-advertising personality may have hindered a balanced appreciation of his achievements, Lifar has been easily scorned by British and American critics who - unlike the French - have not seen the majority of his ballets. In most cases, they did not see Lifar at his dancing peak. His death in Lausanne on Dec. 15 at the age of 81 is a reminder again that Lifar's career - with all its contradictions - needs to be placed in perspective. Universally dubbed one of ballet's greatest egocentrics (even by his admirers), he has also been recognized (even by his detractors) as the major figure in the renewal of 20th-century French ballet. Yet, perhaps in the long run he will and should be remembered for the ideas and actions that were forerunners of many of the premises we now take for granted in dance. Despite the many years he lived in France, Lifar's celebrity was completely international. Serge Diaghilev made him a star, and he played the role to the hilt to the very end as dancer, choreographer and propagandist for dance's rightful place among the arts. Born on April 2, 1905, in Kiev and the son of a civil servant, Lifar began studying ballet at the late age of 16. A friend took him to the private school of Bronislava Nijinska in the Ukranian capital. Nijinska rejected him, but he managed to get into the classes she taught in the state-run Central Studio of the Kiev Opera Ballet, which she then directed. When Nijinska rejoined Diaghilev's company in 1921 and sent for five of her best male pupils from Kiev, Lifar substituted himself for one who dropped out. As a dancer and, later, budding choreographer in the Ballets Russes from 1923 until Diaghilev's death in 1929, he was clearly the impresario's favorite. Diaghilev sent him to study with Enrico Cecchetti in Turin to make up for his lack of classical training. Nicholas Legat was among his teachers in the Ballets Russes. Yet, despite his late start, Lifar had an unassailable stage presence. In a company that was totally experimental, he was perfect material. Nowhere was this more evident than in the young George Balanchine's ballets. Beginning with ''Barabau'' (1925), a comic ballet to a sung cantata in which Lifar was a police sergeant chasing an Italian peasant, the new star was cast in most of Balanchine's ballets. This historical fact was recalled by Balanchine many times in recent years whenever he was accused of not having created major roles for men during his career. The premieres of ''Apollo'' and ''The Prodigal Son,'' of course, featured Lifar in the title role. Lifar also danced in the numbers Balanchine created for Charles B. Cochran's revue in London in 1930. A year earlier, however, Lifar had been invited to dance in the Paris Opera Ballet's version of Beethoven's ''The Creatures of Prometheus.'' Balanchine, the original choreographer, fell ill, and Lifar took over the choreography. In 1931, at the invitation of Jacques Rouche, the Opera's director, Lifar officially became ballet master and dancer. He remained as director of the Paris Opera Ballet until 1945, when charges of collaboration with the Germans - not helped by his own boasts of high connections with German authorities - caused him to leave and become director of the Nouveau Ballet de Monte Carlo. Lifar, cleared of the charges and given a year's suspension, returned as director of the Paris Opera Ballet in 1947. The condition was that he not dance on stage, given the intensity of postwar feelings. In 1949, he danced again, and his last performance at the Opera was as Albrecht in ''Giselle'' in 1956. He resigned as director in 1958, although he was briefly re-engaged as choreographer in 1968. No factual account can quite convey the passions Lifar engendered around him. These were rooted in his artistic ideas, not merely in his well-publicized escapades - challenges to duels with Leonide Massine and the Marquis de Cuevas, or his ballet for helicopters at the 1950 Paris air show. Nor should one focus on his penchant for creating roles for himself. In his version of ''Afternoon of a Faun,'' he was a faun without nymphs. The truth is that it was his serious side that caused the deepest controversy. Essentially, he held high the banner of Neo-Classicism in ballet and campaigned to make choreography an independent art. In the age of Balanchine, this is a familiar esthetic. But it must be remembered that Lifar publicized this viewpoint in the 1930's, when it was far from accepted. In the post-Diaghilev era, choreography was still viewed as subordinate to music and scenery. In retrospect, the ideas of Lifar, Nijinska and Balanchine are remarkably close. The academic idiom was a springboard for innovation. Dancing was to be the prime element in ballet. Early on, Lifar recognized Nijinska's insistence on the autonomy of ballet technique - that its formal values had their own meaning. Lifar publicly went one step further. Dance, as an independent art, could exist without music, he proclaimed in a manifesto in 1935, as much as 15 years before modern dancers, including Merce Cunningham, came to the same conclusion. Lifar realized these ideas in ''Icare'' (1935), his most famous ballet. He choreographed the work to no music - only his internal rhythms. Arthur Honneger and J. E. Szyfer created the percussion score, based on these rhythmic counts, that was played during performances of ''Icare.'' Lifar also added what he called the sixth and seventh positions to ballet's five basic foot positions. In the sixth, the feet were parallel - Lifar often gave his ballerinas plies on toe in this position. In the seventh position, one foot was behind the other in single file. Last summer, we saw it in the archaic profile with shoulder held forward in the Paris Opera Ballet's revival of ''Les Mirages.'' Lifar also asked his ballerinas to knuckle over on toe, to achieve an off-centered look that rendered the old ballet silhouettes more dynamic. Lifar's choreography - the execution of his ideas -did not receive universal recognition. In part this was because, unlike Balanchine and Nijinska, he insisted on dancing and choreographed often to his own capabilities. More important, he had never acquired the full lexicon of classical training they had received in St. Petersburg. Whether he had the requisite genius is another issue. Nonetheless, the seriousness of his endeavour should not be questioned. One has only to recall the decadent image of the Paris Opera Ballet when he took over. He battled with the concept of the Opera ''as a drawing room'' where people came to socialize, and he sought to make ballet more than trivial entertainment. His first order was that the house chandeliers be extinguished during performances. Male dancers were ordered to shave off mustaches, ballerinas forbidden to wear personal jewelry on stage. He ended the practice of using the infamous Foyer de la Danse as meeting ground between ballet girls and admirers. He inaugurated a full evening of ballet every Wednesday, along with ''ballet months.'' He restored star ranking to male dancers and introduced Tchaikovsky's music. He made the ballerinas dance on toe, when they often preferred half-toe. He fostered the careers of France's new ballerinas, including Yvette Chauvire. The reign of the Italian ballerinas was over. Lifar, in fact, sent many of his dancers to study with Russian emigre teachers to soften the Milanese influence in the Paris Opera School. As a young dancer, he was charismatic by all accounts. His dark exotic looks and athletic body gave him an animal intensity. A child's-eye view is unreliable, but in 1949, on a trip to Paris, I saw his portly but still-dramatic presence dominate the stage in ''Icare.'' The image remains. In 1985, I saw the Ballet de Nancy perform his ''Phedre,'' with its libretto and decor by Jean Cocteau. Alternately broken-lined and academic, the choreography needed better dancers, but the ballet's conception was fascinating. In addition to ''Les Mirages,'' the Paris Opera Ballet has recently revived ''Icare'' with Patrick Dupond. Lifar's major Neo-Classical ballet - different from his mostly allegorical works - is ''Suite en Blanc,'' to be performed in May by the school of the Paris Opera Ballet. During the 1979 Bournonville Festival in Copenhagen, I found myself sitting next to Lifar and then met him again in 1982 at Gilberte Cournand's Galerie de la Danse in Paris. Somewhat bitter, he expressed concern that he would be forgotten. History, however, will make a place for Lifar as a serious contributor to 20th-century ballet -one who did things his way. DANCE VIEW
