628|1987\01\04|'ACTIVE' LOUDSPEAKERS ARE ON THE HORIZON|Crossing over into a new year always triggers the prophetic urge, but forecasting is getting harder these days. It was a lot easier when everything was thought to be predestined. In our topsy-turvy times, there are few safe bets left, but at least you can guess at the outcome of things that are well under way or just over the horizon.|Crossing over into a new year always triggers the prophetic urge, but forecasting is getting harder these days. It was a lot easier when everything was thought to be predestined. In our topsy-turvy times, there are few safe bets left, but at least you can guess at the outcome of things that are well under way or just over the horizon. Crossing over into a new year always triggers the prophetic urge, but forecasting is getting harder these days. It was a lot easier when everything was thought to be predestined. In our topsy-turvy times, there are few safe bets left, but at least you can guess at the outcome of things that are well under way or just over the horizon. In audio, the winds of change are blowing strongly from Europe. Meridian and B & W in England, Revox in Switzerland and Bang & Olufsen in Denmark have been pushing the idea of ''active'' loudspeakers. These are speakers containing their own amplifiers, thereby obviating the need for conventional amplifiers or receivers. Such self-powered speakers connect directly to a preamplifier, which has all the necessary operating controls. Advocates of this approach say that it assures the best match between speaker and amplifier since each is made specifically for the other. Moreover, such speakers usually contain a separate bass amplifier to feed the woofer and a treble amplifier to feed the tweeter. That way each amplifier can be designed especially for its assigned segment of the frequency range. Whether such speakers will find a following among venturesome audiophiles in 1987 is still an open question, but several firms are already making a new kind of component to be used in conjunction with ''active'' speakers. This is a one-piece combination of radio tuner and preamplifier, meant to replace the conventional receiver or amplifier wherever speakers containing their own amplifiers are employed. Adcom and Revox have just put such units on the market, and ADS plans to introduce one later in the year. It is also becoming obvious that nobody will be able to hold back DAT any longer. This controversial development - DAT stands for digital audio tape - in effect is the cassette counterpart of compact disks. Carrying the music in digital form, these cassettes - smaller than those now in use - sound every bit as good as CD's and have the added advantage that, like standard audio cassettes, they permit recording as well as playback. CD's, by contrast, are for playback only. This dual capability prompted attempts to keep DAT off the market. Record companies feared that the virtually flawless copies that can be made with DAT would undercut their sales, and, as has been previously reported, they exerted their considerable influence to delay or kill the whole project. Such pressure proved unavailing, and several British, German and American record companies suggested that DAT recorders should be legally required to have a special electronic ''lockout'' device to prevent the copying of recordings. Late in December, the Japanese manufacturers of DAT turned down this request. This refusal, along with the evident readiness of the equipment, seems a sure sign that DAT is now definitely in the offing. The introduction of this top-quality digital recording medium for the home - probably by mid-year - will almost certainly prove the pre-eminent audio event of 1987. However, American record companies are urging Congress to impose a 35 percent import duty on the machines to make copying of records more expensive. DAT makers retort that copying records does not constitute piracy unless it is done for profit. Despite all the activity abroad, the American audio industry stands to gain the most in 1987. After dominating the audio market and other vital areas of the economy for more than a decade, the Japanese are suffering from an overdose of success. Their currency has risen so high in relation to the dollar that Japanese manufacturers have lost much of their cost advantage. Some American audio firms hope to make the most of this by designing basic components that look less complicated and are simpler to operate than most Japanese models. Believing that the current emphasis on highly sophisticated controls and operating features confuses rather than pleases the typical listener, American companies like NAD, Proton, Acoustic Research and ADS are therefore heading in the opposite direction: few knobs, simple operation, plain looks, but no compromise in quality. SOUND
