629|1987\01\04|THE ERA OF BROADWAY REVIVALS|The live Broadway musical may be in the process of becoming scarcer and scarcer, but such shows seem to be taking on new life as recordings. For one thing, the advent of the compact disk has seen the reissuing of many famous original-cast albums of the past. But there has been, as well, a rush to record new versions of past hits in digital sound and often with opera stars in roles created by musical comedy performers.|The live Broadway musical may be in the process of becoming scarcer and scarcer, but such shows seem to be taking on new life as recordings. For one thing, the advent of the compact disk has seen the reissuing of many famous original-cast albums of the past. But there has been, as well, a rush to record new versions of past hits in digital sound and often with opera stars in roles created by musical comedy performers. The live Broadway musical may be in the process of becoming scarcer and scarcer, but such shows seem to be taking on new life as recordings. For one thing, the advent of the compact disk has seen the reissuing of many famous original-cast albums of the past. But there has been, as well, a rush to record new versions of past hits in digital sound and often with opera stars in roles created by musical comedy performers. The current plans of a number of major companies make clear that this is not a one-company, one-producer phenomenon. It is also evident that it is the classical departments of the companies that are drawing up the plans, as ''crossover'' recordings by classical stars become more attractive economically. At CBS, the booming sales of its new recording of ''South Pacific'' with Kiri Te Kanawa and Jose Carreras have not gone unnoticed. It has sold over 300,000 copies in Britain and more than 250,000 in the United States, where it has been No. 1 on the Billboard crossover chart. ''We are dedicating ourselves to recording shows,'' said Joseph F. Dash, senior vice president and general manager of CBS Masterworks, the classical division of the record company. Mr. Dash disclosed that CBS and the Rodgers and Hammerstein office would be collaborating on a new recording of ''Carousel'' under the musical direction of Michael Tilson Thomas, with a cast still to be announced. According to Mr. Dash, studio sessions are planned for June. Ted Chapin, managing director of Rodgers and Hammerstein, acknowledged that ''we and CBS have had a lot of conversations.'' He said the technical sound quality of the 1945 original-cast recording, with John Raitt, made a new version, in updated sound, desirable. Michael Tilson Thomas also figures in plans by CBS Masterworks to record two Gershwin shows that will be part of the forthcoming Gershwin Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music - ''Of Thee I Sing'' and ''Let 'em Eat Cake.'' Neither CBS nor BAM would talk about cast, but Mr. Dash said it would be ''star-studded.'' He said it had not been decided yet whether to record the shows live or in the studio. ''Of Thee I Sing,'' originally staged in 1931, was the first musical to win a Pulitzer Prize. There was no original-cast recording, but a revival with Jack Carson and Paul Hartman did produce an album on Capitol. The one man who in recent years has been most identified with the phenomenon of show albums has been Thomas Shepard, now head of MCA Classics, whose RCA Red Seal recording of Stephen Sondheim's ''Follies'' a couple of years ago was widely acclaimed. Mr. Shepard is not resting, however: his first project for MCA, the original American cast recording of the Broadway hit ''Me and My Girl,'' has just been released, Mr. Shepard also is planning to record two previously unrecorded Sondheim shows - ''The Frogs'' and ''Evening Primrose'' - hopefully with Mandy Patinkin in the latter. ''The Frogs'' was originally produced by the Yale Repertory Theater in 1974. ''Evening Primrose'' was written for television in 1967. Mr. Shepard, who has been closely identified with Sondheim recordings, also said he had recently been to San Diego to see a production of a new Sondheim work, ''Into the Woods,'' but that no recording plans had been discussed yet. ''Carousel'' also figures in Mr. Shepard's plans. He said he was working on the possibility of a new recording of the show, but would not be more specific as to casting than to say he was ''hoping'' to get Barbara Cook, Marilyn Horne, Sarah Brightman and Mr. Patinkin. The new attraction of musical shows for classical labels extends beyond the shores of America, as well. Deutsche Grammophon, of course, had a huge success with Leonard Bernstein conducting his own ''West Side Story'' with an operatic cast, and now London Records is planning a new recording of ''My Fair Lady,'' with Kiri Te Kanawa of the opera stage and Jeremy Irons of screen and stage as Eliza Doolittle and Professor Henry Higgins, respectively, the roles created by Julie Andrews and Rex Harrison. John Mauceri will conduct. And another label, EMI/Angel, says it ''wants to do'' a new recording of ''Kiss Me, Kate,'' but that no cast had been lined up yet. The original cast recording, of course, starred Alfred Drake and Patricia Morison. Aside from the obvious goal of turning an honest dollar, what else is prompting the rush to put old musicals on records these days? Irv Lichtman, deputy editor of Billboard and a close student of American musicals on records, suggested that record companies undoubtedly wanted to expand the audiences for classical artists. He also said he beleived the companies felt there was a strong market for old musicals with new casts and updated, digital sound. Karajan Operas Despite the spate of reissues on compact disks, there have been and will continue to be many glaring omissions. One group of omissions -many opera recordings conducted by Herbert von Karajan - is about to see the light on CD. London Records, having resolved contractual problems, has announced the release of eight of them over the next two years, beginning in February with the 1961 ''Otello'' with the Vienna Philharmonic and a cast headed by Renata Tebaldi and Mario del Monaco in a two-CD set. Later in 1987, London will issue the 1972 ''La Boheme'' with Mirella Freni and Luciano Pavarotti, with the Berlin Philharmonic. Also coming up in 1987 are ''Madama Butterfly,'' also with Freni and Pavarotti, and ''Die Fledermaus,'' with Regina Resnik, Eberhard Wachter and Hilde Gueden. In 1988, London's Karajan opera release schedule will include ''Tosca'' with Leontyne Price and Giuseppe di Stefano; ''The Marriage of Figaro'' with Jose van Dam; ''Boris Godunov'' with Nicolai Ghiaurov, and ''Aida'' with Renata Tebaldi and Carlo Bergonzi. And Davis Operas Reissues of another famous series of operas has also been started by Philips - the Berlioz cycle conducted by Sir Colin Davis. Just out on compact disk are two works. The first is ''La Damnation de Faust,'' on two disks, with Nicolai Gedda as Faust and Jules Bastin as Mephistopheles. Josephine Veasey is the Marguerite. The other release, on four disks, is ''Les Troyens,'' with Jon Vickers and Miss Veasey.
