63|1987\01\01|NEW LOOK FOR HISTORIC HOUSES: ACCURACY REPLACES IDEALISM|CURATORS of historic houses are responding to new technologies and methods of research to change the long-cherished Colonial Revival taste, which governed earlier room restorations. From the 1930's through the 1970's, experts say, many rooms in these houses were furnished according to an idealized version of 18th- and early 19th-century elegance.|CURATORS of historic houses are responding to new technologies and methods of research to change the long-cherished Colonial Revival taste, which governed earlier room restorations. From the 1930's through the 1970's, experts say, many rooms in these houses were furnished according to an idealized version of 18th- and early 19th-century elegance. CURATORS of historic houses are responding to new technologies and methods of research to change the long-cherished Colonial Revival taste, which governed earlier room restorations. From the 1930's through the 1970's, experts say, many rooms in these houses were furnished according to an idealized version of 18th- and early 19th-century elegance. According to Christine Meadows, curator of Mount Vernon, during those five decades historical accuracy was considered secondary to ''making the room settings pretty, warm and attractive.'' Visitors to the Governor's Palace at Colonial Williamsburg and to Mount Vernon and Gunston Hall, which are near Washington, are seeing rerestored rooms, simpler and brighter, shorn of their Colonial Revival trappings of fussy curtains, heavy rugs and drably painted walls. These changes have been brought about by the results of three areas of research: advances in chemical-analysis techniques, which have shown a wide range of brighter colors; new methods of interior archeology, using special lights and filters to reveal lost architecural elements, and the increased scholarship and use of period inventories as prime resources. John Davis, senior curator of the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, describes the changes at the Governor's Palace as ''a shift away from the 1930's view of decorative arts as fine arts into the contemporary social-cultural approach.'' By meticulously following the 15,000-item inventory made at the death in 1770 of Baron de Botetourt, sixth Governor of the Virginia Colony, as well as his butler's account books recently uncovered at Badminton House in England, curators have been able to discern the palace's arrangements during his tenure. Over the past seven years, the Governor's Palace has been completely rerestored to reflect the findings of the inventory. In the 1930's reconstruction, the dining room was furnished with a single banquet table. The inventory, however, indicated a more multiuse room. Now there are two smaller dining tables, 12 mahogany chairs, smoking chairs, writing desks, library tables and ink stands for the gentlemen who lingered over port and politics after dinner. Even the paint color is different. In another document, ''The Executive Journals of the Council'' of 1727, the curators discovered that the dining room had been newly painted in a pearl color. Off came the stone-gray paint of the 1930's in favor of a pearly color with a touch of blue. Curtains and floor coverings are usually the areas that are changed. Research shows that certain 18th-century window treatments were less ornate than Colonial Revivalists believed and that sea-grass matting was used instead of Oriental rugs. Often floorboards were simply left bare. Nowhere is this better exemplified than in George Washington's study at Mount Vernon, which has been rerestored in recent years, according to his death inventory of 1799. Formerly, the room had dark stained floors and white-painted bookshelves. It was formally furnished with a wing chair, a Queen Anne side chair, an Oriental rug and damask drapes copied from a Chippendale pattern. The floors have been stripped and the paneling and window frames have been painted in a rediscovered faux-bois pattern. The Oriental rug has been removed, as has the Queen Anne chair. What remains is a stand-up desk, Washington's dressing table, a book press, a globe of the world and windows that are bare, without draperies - simple necessities for an early-rising plantation owner. Gone are the days when Mount Vernon's curators only flirted with the inventory and accepted as gifts furnishings not necessarily correct. In 1979, Matthew J. Mosca, a conservator of architectural finishes, was hired to analyze and ascertain the original paint colors. ''Formerly, we used only the scraping technique and matched the color at the right chronological level,'' said Miss Meadows, the curator of Mount Vernon. ''The color we were big on was putty.'' Over the years, the original colors were altered by air, light and dirt to become putty-colored. Mount Vernon's dining room now sparkles in verdigris, a 1980's change. ''Frequently forgotten,'' Miss Meadows added, ''is that interior illumination was a scarce commodity in 1799 so everything had to reflect and enhance light.'' As in other historic houses now being rerestored, Mount Vernon's bright new paints were custom-mixed using 18th-century formulas and applied with traditional round hog-bristle brushes. These brushes pick up the pigments in layers and create more luminescent surfaces. Gunston Hall, a one-and-a-half-story brick Georgian house on the Potomac River south of Mount Vernon, was the home of George Mason, who drafted the Bill of Rights. Designed in the late 1750's by William Buckland, an English indentured servant, Gunston Hall displays the earliest example of chinoiserie carving in the colonies. Although many clues about the original interiors were previously researched, the 1950 restoration gave the house only a nonspecific English elegance, according to its curator, Susan Borchardt. Architectural detective work began in 1981, using red-glass filters and black light to discover both incorrect moldings and the placement of lost architectural elements. The missing Doric entablature beneath the crown molding in the entrance hall was reconstructed last year. Curators think that the original was probably removed and sold in the 19th century. High-intensity light revealed ghosts - the bare outlines of the long-gone molding's metopes and triglyphs. Larry Jones, a restoration craftsman working at Gunston Hall, has used 38 different chisels to carve the rosette medallions in the replacement moldings. To determine the design for these and the 12 hand-carved pilasters, Mr. Jones consulted, as no doubt Buckland himself did, drawings in Abraham Swan's 1745 ''The British Architect,'' a bible of interior design that was in every colonial gentleman's library. In Washington, curators of the 1800 Octagon House are gradually changing its character after researching period documents. New colors are being introduced and almost 30 layers of old paint are being removed from the rosette and bellflower com position work in the entrance hall. During a structural restoration in the 1960's, according to its curator, Nancy Davis, the entrance hall was painted buff with gray trim, Now painted verdigris with stone-white crown molding, chair rails and door surrounds, the hall presents the same look it must have had when Dolley Madison and the President took refuge there in 1814, after the White House burned. Mindful of future days when technological advances may reveal additional information, several curators of historic houses are leaving small areas untouched: a patch of wall in a drawing room, a bedroom baseboard molding or a string of rosettes on a fireplace surround. In the 1804 George Read II House, which is in the Colonial town of New Castle, Del., the curators are rerestoring most of the rooms with Federal furniture examples recorded in the l836 estate inventory. However, they decided to keep the dining room, restored by private owners in the 1920's, in its opulent Colonial Revival state as an example of the once-popular style. Since traditional pigments used in rerestorations will change as rapidly as they did in the 18th century, a question facing curators of historic houses is how frequently should walls be repainted for historical accuracy. In the meantime, homeowners who wish to keep up with the Colonial look, marketed by the sole distributors of the Williamsburg paint colors, the Martin Senour Paint Company, will want to know that ''Palace Dining Room Gray'' has been replaced on the paint card by ''Palace Dining Room Pearl-Blue.''
