630|1987\01\04|CBS ORDERS UP A MORNING SHOW, LIGHTON THE NEWS|The producer of ''The Morning Program,'' the new broadcast that will replace the ''CBS Morning News'' next week, was interviewing a well-known New York journalist for the job of co-host on the program. ''Are you a news purist?'' the producer asked. ''No,'' replied the journalist, ''I'm not.'' It was just the right answer; he got the job.|The producer of ''The Morning Program,'' the new broadcast that will replace the ''CBS Morning News'' next week, was interviewing a well-known New York journalist for the job of co-host on the program. ''Are you a news purist?'' the producer asked. ''No,'' replied the journalist, ''I'm not.'' It was just the right answer; he got the job. The producer of ''The Morning Program,'' the new broadcast that will replace the ''CBS Morning News'' next week, was interviewing a well-known New York journalist for the job of co-host on the program. ''Are you a news purist?'' the producer asked. ''No,'' replied the journalist, ''I'm not.'' It was just the right answer; he got the job. It might seem a strange litmus test for CBS to be applying to journalists, but news purism is the last thing that CBS wants on ''The Morning Program.'' The new show means to rise from the rubble of the old ''CBS Morning News,'' a broadcast that was forever flailing in a tangle of contradiction and confused purpose - To be news, or not to be news? - until at last it was killed this summer. When CBS executives decided to cancel ''The Morning News,'' their rationale was that even though the program had tried to be soft and amusing like NBC's ''Today'' and ABC's ''Good Morning America,'' sleepy morning viewers assumed that anything coming from CBS News was hard-ball journalism and switched channels. The CBS News image, the network brass concluded, smudged the ''Morning News'' like a taint and doomed it to failure. So, they turned the time period out of the news division and hired Bob Shanks, an entertainment producer, to make something different, something that would work, something that most of all would not be news. This week, the show that Mr. Shanks has invented for CBS is going through its final run-throughs, and, although its chances are uncertain, one objective is guaranteed: It will never be mistaken for news. ''The Morning Program'' will feature, among other things, a Hollywood gossip segment, a video dating service, a comic co-host, a comic weatherman, a comic announcer and, if things work out, a comic writer-performer with a specialty in rude noises. There will also be a dog. The search for success in the morning at CBS has been so frustrating that William S. Paley, the founder of CBS, has himself taken a direct hand in leading the new program to the starting gate. And now, after 30 years of disappointment with news efforts, the network patriarch says, ''I think we're going to have a hell of a strong show in the morning.'' After a pause, he adds, ''But you've got to keep your fingers crossed. You never know.'' Mr. Shanks's fingers, it is safe to guess, are firmly crossed. His task is to develop a program that not only succeeds in the ratings but must survive in the highly charged environment of CBS. CBS News is a proud and, at the moment, pained institution; it was badly shaken by the decision to take 90 minutes of its two-hour morning time block away for the sake of an entertainment show. Not all at CBS News are cheering for the success of the celebrity-heavy, gimmick-driven comedy package that has come to rest in the place where news used to reside, and Mr. Shanks knows it. Last week, for example, word went around the building that Don Hewitt, the executive producer of ''60 Minutes,'' suggested to Laurence A. Tisch, the CBS chief executive officer, that the moribund ''CBS Morning News'' was in the best shape it had ever been in and that he reconsider the decision to kill it. ''We do have natural enemies in the building,'' said Mr. Shanks, ''there's no question.'' Befriending the news division may come, but first, there is the matter of solving the mystery of morning television. Beginning a week from tomorrow, CBS will be breaking up the traditional two-hour morning time block, with a half-hour of hard news at 7 A.M., followed by the new ''Morning Program'' from 7:30 to 9. Mr. Shanks, an experienced producer, has been there before, having developed the then-revolutionary ''Good Morning America'' program for ABC. This time around, Mr. Shanks, who was hired by CBS in September, decided early on to create a sort of radio comedy show with pictures. The format that will be revealed to viewers next week features the actress Mariette Hartley as the wacky center of the program, with the sober countenance of Rolland Smith, the former anchorman at the CBS flagship station, WCBS/Channel 2 in New York City, at her side. Mr. Smith will be there ''to play off of,'' as Miss Hartley put it. Bob Saget, a comedian of the urban comedy-club tilt, will be the announcer and general-purpose sidekick, and Mark McEwen, a veteran of morning radio comedy, will be the weatherman. Their show will take place on an elaborate set designed as a combination country kitchen/ family room, complete with a working fireplace. In the early stages, Mr. Shanks was so guarded about the format that he conducted a secret run-through at CBS headquarters at Black Rock; for an audience, he corralled a group of CBS executives, who were asked to vow silence on what they saw. But now the show has been pronounced ready; if there is a theme to it, it might be the phrase that Miss Hartley employed when introducing the program to CBS affiliates in a closed-circuit broadcast two weeks ago: ''We think there's more to life than news.'' The format certainly attests to that belief. The show will start each day with a weather report, followed by a viewers' poll. Viewers will be invited to cast their votes on such subjects as the national highway speed limit and sex education classes, with a daily ''resolution'' to each issue coming at the end of the broadcast (which presents something of a problem to viewers in western time zones, who, watching a taped version of the show, will not be able to participate). There will be personal finance segments, a segment called ''Living Better'' that will deal with relationships, and a segment called ''Sensible Shopper,'' slotted at the end of each show on the premise that by then, most viewers will be women who are staying at home. There will be a heavy emphasis on comedy (underscored by the fact that David Steinberg, the comedian, was hired to direct the show's on-air promotions) centered in a regular feature called ''The Comedy Club,'' featuring brief portions of stand-up comedy acts. Also, Mr. Saget will make little comedy films, a la the ''Mr. Mike'' segments from the old ''Saturday Night Live'' show. (In a sample shown to affiliates, Mr. Saget screens a tape of his own wedding, with a running commentary: ''It was a Jewish wedding. There was a $2 cover charge.'') The show will be a haven for celebrities, with a gossip columnist, a daily star interview (Frank Sinatra is said to be already booked) and a segment called ''Teachers,'' which will have celebrities appearing with teachers who made a difference in their lives. News will not be completely unwelcome, with five-minute local and network news blocks inserted on the quarter hour, and a running segment of news features reported, as Mr. Smith put it to the affiliates, ''from a different and more human perspective than any other morning program.'' One such story, he said, would explore the human side of AIDS. ''We'll introduce you to a bright, attractive young woman who's suffering from AIDS. And we won't just see her once. We'll be following her over a period of time so that you'll get to know her and share with her the toll that AIDS is taking on her and her family.'' And then, there is the ''Personals'' segment. In the sample segment shown to affiliates, a young man named Jim appears on screen and proclaims, ''I'm looking for an energetic, outgoing and fun-loving woman with whom I can share candlelight dinners, drives along the coast and wild nights on the town . . . .'' Mate-hunters will communicate by mail, through a special post-office box. The feature raises questions that CBS never had to consider when it was in the news business in the morning. At a recent news conference to announce the format, a reporter asked Mr. Shanks, ''Say you do some matching up of people and let's say some kook has responded to that and somebody is murdered or hurt. Who is responsible?'' Mr. Shanks assured the reporter that CBS has ''done everything we prudently can do to prevent that.'' The ''Morning Program'' might have become something quite different had CBS landed the host it sought first, the actor Alan Alda. Mr. Alda was contacted by the network to host the show and declined. ''He's a movie star and feels that he has play left in that career, which I agree with,'' said Thomas F. Leahy, executive vice president of the CBS Television Network, who is the corporate executive in charge of the new show. ''He wasn't interested in getting up at 4 o'clock in the morning.'' But Mr. Shanks had worked with Miss Hartley on a TV movie and on a pilot for a children's show and was convinced that she could carry his new program. ''I saw in that program that she could interview, that she could react to the moment and that she could be funny and warm,'' Mr. Shanks says. That settled, there began the search for Ms. Hartley's sidekick, her straight man. As it happened, Mr. Smith was, as he puts it, ''busy acclimatizing myself to the wonderful sense of freedom and exploring opportunities.'' He was out of work, having been released this fall by Channel 2 in a salary dispute after 16 years with the station. There was some surprise at CBS over the choice of Mr. Smith, who in his long career as an anchorman had never shown any particular talent for comedy. But Mr. Shanks was steadfast. ''He's deeper and he goes wider than anybody around here thinks,'' Mr. Shanks says. ''You can't have two comedians, two people like her. It doesn't work in a marriage, it doesn't work in television.'' Mr. Smith has been cast in the role of the super-straight Dad, and will be the butt of the rest of the cast's jokes. ''He knows thathe's aware of it,'' Miss Hartley says. One hope, according to a cast member, is that ''little old ladies in the Midwest'' will cheer for the underdog Mr. Smith. One CBS News executive, who has been let in on the plan, offered this analogy: ''He's the successful Westchester doctor, she's the wacky wife that everybody loves. They'll go to parties, she'll push somebody in the pool, and he'll just kind of chuckle.'' Mr. Smith is unworried about his new role. ''I'm not going to do anything that will hurt my reputation as a journalist,'' he says. ''If somebody chooses to poke fun, to have fun with that because I choose to be straight, that's O.K.'' The format will certainly distinguish the program from a newscast, and there'll be another difference: ''The Morning Program'' will be performed before a live audience, which presents something of a difficulty. It will be broadcast from a studio on West 57th street, a block away from the grubby West Side piers - ''not a lot of foot traffic in that area at 7:30 in the morning,'' Mr. Shanks allows. ''Our first week may be a series of shows on the homeless.'' The audience will participate in the show, to the degree that each seat in the studio is equipped with ''Yes'' and ''No'' buttons, allowing the audience to voice instant approval or rejection. The notion has suggested to staff members a number of comic possibilities, including sending a camera crew to the dressing quarters of, say, a Minneapolis attorney. The audience might vote ''Yes'' as the attorney dons his blue pin-striped trousers, but proclaim ''No'' as he tries to slip into a pair of argyle socks. Still to be convinced of the effectiveness of all this are the CBS affiliates, who have long been pressuring the network to become competitive in the morning. One station, WAGA in Atlanta, dropped the ''Morning News'' last summer and has not yet agreed to carry the new program. ''We can't carry it on the basis of what they've shown us,'' said Paul Raymon, general manager of the station. ''We think they're on to something, but we're going to just have to wait and see.'' Mr. Shanks will also soon discover the joys of competing with Steve Friedman, the producer of NBC's ''Today'' show, whose lust for a fight promises to make the new program's early going interesting. Mr. Friedman saw the detailed preview of ''The Morning Program'' shown to CBS affiliates, and offers his assessment in a series of one-liners: ''It's 'The Mourning Show.' Is it true that the theme song is going to be 'Taps'?'' ''This program,'' he adds, ''has not one chance in hell of working.'' Mr. Friedman's premise is that, in supposing that viewers are not interested in news, the CBS program insults the morning audience. ''They're very cynical. What they're saying is, 'O.K., folks, for all you women who are not smart, we'll numb your mind and give you some jokes.'' Mr. Shanks, a quiet man with a gentlemanly reputation, seems up for the fray. He noted a recent, fairly typical ''Today'' show featuring a piece on Cybill Shepherd and said he would advise Mr. Friedman, ''Physician, heal thyself. Is Cybill Shepherd news? It's looking like 'Entertainment Today,' frequently.'' For all of its detractors, the new program has one very staunch, and significant, supporter - William S. Paley, the network founder who returned to active duty as chairman in a boardroom coup last fall. ''The Morning Program'' has provided an avenue for programming involvement for Mr. Paley, who is now 85. When Mr. Shanks and some of his staff needed to go to California to survey the comedy scene there, they flew west with Mr. Paley in his private jet. He has been so close an observer that he has offered criticism of Miss Hartley's makeup job. ''There had always been too much confusion about what we did and didn't do'' on the ''Morning News'' program, Mr. Paley said in an interview. Of the new program he said, ''It's entertaining, effective and it will appeal to women. It has great, great promise, and we really need something like that now.'' And if there is caution toward the new show at CBS News, there is also a buzz of excitement, the sense that, after all the failures, there may be a show in the works that viewers will watch. One newsman, whose assessment of the show is not especially flattering, also notes that there is a mood of adventure to the enterprise, which has an uplifting effect on a place rocked by layoffs and other distresses. ''In an institution with no people in it anymore, it's very unusual to have that other feeling in the same building.'' And in a way, Mr. Shanks believes that he can capitalize on all the grief experienced by the ''Morning News,'' the headline-drawing parade of anchors, formats and producers that attended that failed enterprise. ''Ironically, the pains of this summer may have worked to my advantage,'' he says. If nothing else, he adds, ''we'll get enormous audience sampling from people waiting to see another auto accident.''
