631|1987\01\04|THE EAST BLOC TOLERATES JAZZ BUT MUTES ITS DISSIDENT NOTE|Throughout the East Bloc, jazz is no longer decadent or even suspect. In fact, everywhere, with the exception of Czechoslovakia - where paradoxically jazz has had the longest and most developed traditions - the music has been divorced from politics.|Throughout the East Bloc, jazz is no longer decadent or even suspect. In fact, everywhere, with the exception of Czechoslovakia - where paradoxically jazz has had the longest and most developed traditions - the music has been divorced from politics. Throughout the East Bloc, jazz is no longer decadent or even suspect. In fact, everywhere, with the exception of Czechoslovakia - where paradoxically jazz has had the longest and most developed traditions - the music has been divorced from politics. But if this means that jazz is now widely and openly heard in Eastern Europe, even embraced by certain Communist governments, it also means that to a large extent it has been wrenched from a social context, from the demimonde of protest and the dynamics of cultural opposition. Once-forbidden fruit has been distilled and diluted, and in the process, its wine has lost some of its bite. Obviously, something similar has taken place in the West. Music that was first formed in bordellos and speakeasies has found acceptance and honor in high places, and along the way Dionysian impulses have, to some extent, been replaced by formalism. At the same time, in the West, new styles - rock, reggae, punk, New Wave -spawned in subterranean warrens have shot through and drawn wider audiences as successive generations tried to get their own licks in, defying whatever establishment they thought weighed them down. But in the Communist states of Europe, where culture has been, and still largely continues to be, a concern of monopolistic state power, such transformations are not organic. Rather, they tend to be abrupt and bureaucratic. Ruling elites, under pressure from worldly elements, often including their own children, are persuaded to deem the impermissible permissible, and even at times desirable. And so it was with jazz, but as the music shifted from clandestine cellars to the concert halls of the palaces of science and culture, the undertones changed. ''There is no doubt that jazz is now more than acceptable, it's fashionable,'' said Tomasz Tluszkiewicz, who as Continued on page 00 the elected head of Poland's Jazz Society arranges concerts, produces records, and books Polish and foreign jazz performers. ''But I would be lying if I said I did not miss the old days when jazz had a more provocative meaning.'' Mr. Tluszzkiewicz, who is 42 years old, gave up his job as a professor of engineering to work full-time in jazz. ''For me,'' he says, ''in my youth, jazz offered escape and stretched my imagination. It was tied to yearnings of oppressed blacks, to spontaneity, even to images of abandon and sexuality, and I think that was the way it was for most of my contemporaries. It still reflects some of these elements, but today it is more likely that the attraction is for jazz as music rather than for a comprehensive metaphor of a free life.'' For older generations both the music and the metaphor were terribly significant. Ernest Bryl, a Polish poet, recalls that 30 years ago students he knew risked expulsion from university for possessing jazz albums. A popular film made here three years ago called ''There Used to Be Jazz'' documented that period in the 50's when musicians played in basement rooms, putting up mattresses against the doors to muffle the sound and keep passers-by from denouncing them. Also at that time, Leopold Tyrmand, one of Poland's earliest and most outspoken dissident writers, who died last year in Florida, wrote passionately about jazz as the quintessential embodiment of spontaneous expression and the idea of freedom. But when after the Stalinist 50's the music began to gain official sanction, he lost interest in it as a literary subject. Josef Skvorecky, the emigre Czech novelist now living in Toronto, has focused on jazz in Czechoslovakia and his own involvement with the saxophone as a recurring motif in which the music, banned first by the Nazis and then by the Communists, nurtures flickering flames of faith in freedom, joy and redemption, for himself as a young man and, even now, for the Czech and Slovak nations. Now everywhere in the East Bloc except in Mr. Skvorecky's homeland, the battle against jeans and jazz has been conceded. Today, there are officially sponsored jazz festivals in all the East Bloc countries and in the Soviet Union. The annual Warsaw Jazz Festival is probably the single most popular cultural event in Poland, rivaling major Chopin recitals and dwarfing festivals of Russian popular songs and army choirs. Jazz, from swing to bebop to fusion, is played on state radio. There is a division of jazz at the state music conservatory in Katowice, and in Poland alone there are nearly 300 musicians who make their living exclusively playing jazz. An international publication, Jazz Forum, is produced in Warsaw - printed in English - and receives a Government subsidy. Jazz clubs exist throughout the bloc, even in small towns, and probably the most recognizable American voice in all East Europe is that of Willis Conover, the slow-speaking host of the Voice of America jazz programs. A few weeks ago, in a neighborhood jazz club in Budapest, the Hungarian jazz pianist Gyorgy Szabados reflected the more formalistic trends of much of today's jazz as he explained to a visitor what he sought to address and engage with his music. In an adjoining hall some 200 young people, dressed for the most part like 50's college students, sat listening to long, dissonant pieces for horns, drums and guitars that were played by Mr. Szabados's colleagues. The 48-year-old pianist, who was trained and still works as a surgeon, said that jazz had been his passion since childhood and that he dreams of the day he can leave behind the practice of medicine and earn his living entirely by playing his long compositions, with their floating and fluctuating rhythmic patterns. For 45 minutes Mr. Szabados talked of his influences: Bartok, Bach, Transylvanian folklore, Far Eastern philosophies, Indian and Japanese music, and yes, the Modern Jazz Quartet, Sun Ra and the clarinetest Anthony Braxton, with whom he has made a record called Szabraxtondos. At no point was there even a hint of ''us-against-them'' sensibilities. No intimation of the hip against the square, the forces of spontaneous improvisation against the Communist virtues of planning and predictability. Instead, Mr. Szabados revealed the eclectic relativism of many of today's Eastern jazz musicians. He respected Mahler, atonality, the Beatles and Jewish klezmer music. At times he talked of combining all these influences and elements into music that he said would advance ''universal values of inner peace and harmony,'' but which he hoped to synthesize musically as Hungarian jazz. Some of his fans, sitting in the adjoining hall, claim he has succeeded. ''When I listen to Szabodos, I can see Transylvania,'' said one young painter. Transylvania is Hungary's shame and obsession, the lost land and its sizable Hungarian-speaking population living under Rumanian rule. Mr. Szabados's music would be considered avant-garde even in TriBeCa, but it is not regarded as a challenge by the Hungarian cultural authorities. For them it is a matter of personal choice whether people prefer Szabados's jazz or Bartok or chamber music or gypsy music or rock-and-roll or Muzak. This is not so in Czechoslovakia, where the major social conflict is over cultural freedom and the key battle is being fought over jazz. There is official, state-approved jazz, and there is illicit, illegal jazz identified with a group of jazz lovers known as the Jazz Section. Buttons with Jazz Section insignia and Jazz Section graffiti are regarded by authorities with the same suspicion that attaches to Solidarity insignia in Poland. In Czechoslovakia, there are rules governing the performance of even sanctioned jazz. No performers can appear in jeans, presumably because this would cause semiotic overload in an audience, doubling up Western symbols. For at least five years the Government has sought to circumscribe, curb and destroy the Jazz Section with its 5,000 dues-paying members and larger legion of sympathizers. Ruled nonexistent, the Jazz Section proclaimed itself through meetings, publications and art shows. The group's publications were the most widely read sources of uncensored material not only about jazz but about modern literature, movies, theater and modern art. The Government explained its attempts to close down the Jazz Section by saying the group had concerned itself with cultural matters that had nothing to do with jazz. Karel Srp, the 52-year-old elected president of the Jazz Section, never hid the fact that he regarded jazz as much more than music, and he defended the group's right to extend all cultural freedom. Shortly before his arrest last fall, he told this reporter that jazz in its broadest sense connoted improvisation, spontaneity and the universality of culture, and that to be understood jazz had to be explored within contemporary reality, which means all the ideas, thoughts and beliefs of our time. He particularly incurred the anger of the authorities by traveling to an international meeting in Budapest to seek support for greater free expression in Czechoslovakia within the framework of the Helsinki agreement. Even before that Mr. Srp lost his editor's job because of his Jazz Section activities. He said he did not care and began working as a lathe operator. The group's lawyer had the tires of his car slashed. The association was denied the right to stage concerts, to have a phone, to use the mails. Still it persevered. Then, last September, Mr. Srp and six fellow elected officials were arrested. They are still in jail under investigation for alleged involvement in illegal financial transactions, and a show trial is likely to be held this month. The defendants can face as much as four years in prison. Meanwhile, a new temporary leadership of the Jazz Section has been formed and with the support of Charta 77, the major Czechoslovak intellectual human-rights organization, these people are eager to publicize the case, hoping to bring international pressure to bear on Czechoslovakia to release Mr. Srp and his associates and to leave the Jazz Section free to foster not just music, but criticism, discussion, debate and ideas. Part of the Czechoslovak defense against oppression has always been sly whimsy, and a Good Soldier Schweik approach to life's problems is evident in Prague's beer halls and wine bars. It is a style that is suited to deadpan put-on, irony and canniness, all of which shape the music of a popular, totally nonpolitical jazz band called the Original Prague Syncopated Orchestra. Its 14 members, all in their 20's and 30's, play white and black jazz of the 1920's, songs originally performed by groups such as Clarence Williams's Blue Five, Fletcher Henderson's Orchestra and Joe Manone's Harmony Kings. The singer uses a megaphone like Rudy Vallee and the musicians wear Harold Lloyd spectacles and part their hair in the middle. So do their fans. Why the 1920's, four of them were asked after a concert. ''It was the best time,'' said all four in deadpan harmony. ''It was the best time.''
