632|1987\01\04|CAPONE'S CHICAGO STIRS AGAIN FOR 'THE UNTOUCHABLES'|''I wonder,'' an old parishioner asks, referring to a legendary Chicago priest, ''what Pat Mulloy would think of this 'Untouchables'?'' He means the $20 million Paramount film saga of Treasury agent Eliot Ness's Prohibition-era war against Al Capone that is to be released in June. Brian DePalma has just finished shooting it in and around the rococo niches and coves of|''I wonder,'' an old parishioner asks, referring to a legendary Chicago priest, ''what Pat Mulloy would think of this 'Untouchables'?'' He means the $20 million Paramount film saga of Treasury agent Eliot Ness's Prohibition-era war against Al Capone that is to be released in June. Brian DePalma has just finished shooting it in and around the rococo niches and coves of ''I wonder,'' an old parishioner asks, referring to a legendary Chicago priest, ''what Pat Mulloy would think of this 'Untouchables'?'' He means the $20 million Paramount film saga of Treasury agent Eliot Ness's Prohibition-era war against Al Capone that is to be released in June. Brian DePalma has just finished shooting it in and around the rococo niches and coves of Chicago that foam like the mob's best beer with the memories and mood of the 1920's. Father Mulloy, a young priest during that mythical decade, had, against the wishes of his archbishop, acted as a quasi-peacemaker go-between with the city's gangs, said prayers over many a slain mobster's flower-choked grave and finally been exiled for several years to South America, allegedly for knowing too much. When the television series (unrelated except by name to the David Mamet script of the new movie) made its debut in 1959, Father Mulloy watched carefully. ''They're all there,'' he reportedly mumbled as Capone, Frank Nitti and others trooped across the screen of his black-and-white set. ''But they've got it all wrong.'' Father Mulloy, himself long years dead, might have a different opinion standing in the time warp of Union Station during the week of long nights as Mr. DePalma directs a spectacular shootout between Treasury agents and Capone's men on the worn marble staircase now glistening under braces of blinding lights. A giant blue-trimmed banner cascades down a far wall, announcing a torchlight parade and rally at which the union leader John L. Lewis will speak. Extras in period dress mill about the pew-like waiting benches and the re-created green-trimmed offices and shops. ''I'm from Waterloo, Iowa,'' a slim blonde in a cloche hat confides to a visitor. ''I don't have any lines, you know, but I'm hoping.'' Sailors look up from a cluster of crisp duffel bags toward Mr. DePalma, patient as a chemist over his powders, setting up a shot with a camera mounted on a Chapman crane to follow a baby carriage tumbling down the slippery treads. ''Ever see 'Potemkin'?'' someone asks a young studio aide. '' 'Potemkin'?'' she responds in a puzzled tone. ''The word is, De Niro's here,'' a security guard whispers, as if announcing the arrival of Capone himself 60 years before. Mr. De Niro is in fact playing Capone in this film, which also boasts Sean Connery as an aging Chicago policeman and Kevin Costner as Eliot Ness. ''See up there?'' the guard asks, gesturing to the top of the staircase where the window of a mock Army recruiting office was shot out the night before. ''They left all the broken glass and fake blood there. Scared hell out of the commuters this morning.'' Mr. De Niro is here, Capone is here and with them the numinous magic of America's fascination with movie stars and gangsters. ''Bobby's been trying to gain weight,'' one assistant says to another, ''and they don't want anybody to see him.'' ''Yeah,'' an associate counters, ''I hear he went to Italy, ate a lot of pasta, but he only gained 20 pounds.'' Mr. De Niro has arrived in Chicago after completing a run in a Broadway play, is registered as Mr. R. Benson at the Ritz Carlton, has been studying Movietone newsreels of Alphonse Capone, has requested silk underwear from the same New York Sulka shop from which Big Al bought his. ''They brought him in the back in a limousine,'' the assistant says hoarsely, as Mr. DePalma calls for quiet on the set. ''He's upstairs trying on pads and scars.'' The shuffling and coughing halt in the great space of the concourse. The period baby carriage is trundled up the steps by the stunt coordinator, Gary Hymes. At the top he places his 16-month-old son, Colin, inside it. ''The kid stops crying the minute he puts him in,'' another aide confides. ''I hear he's taking gymnastics and swimming lessons already.'' The safari-jacketed Mr. DePalma peers down impassively as the carriage and the camera roll. Just out of camera range, Mr. Hymes, with two other stunt men descending warily behind him, bumps the perambulator backward under the tracking camera all the way down the steps. ''That was very nice,'' Mr. DePalma says softly, signaling for a retake. The visitor edges around the crowd toward the far staircase. A broadly smiling white-haired man sits on a director's chair next to a pair of padlocked wooden chests. ''I'm the gun man,'' Branco Wohlfahrt says cheerfully in a thick accent. ''I come only when they need a fully automatic weapon.'' He nudges the chests with his foot. ''I'm from L. S. Mercantile. We do 90 percent the movies, 'The A Team,' too.'' He points toward several Tommy guns displayed on a table. ''Rubber. Go ahead, feel them. When we were in Montana for the Canadian scenes, they used them on horseback, but they have to be careful not to bend the barrels. Doesn't look right.'' Mr. Wohlfahrt kicks the chests. ''These are real guns in here. You know, it's harder to shoot blanks than real bullets. No place for the explosive force to go. I'm the first one who fixed the Luger to shoot right in the movies.'' The visitor heads again for the stairway. Art Linson, the amiable, stubbly bearded producer, leans protectively against the wall at the base of the stairs, holding a dead cigar in one hand. ''I asked David Mamet - we were at dinner in the Village after he won his Pulitzer Prize - if he'd like to write a new version of 'The Untouchables.' Right away, he said, 'I'm in.' '' Someone calls a question to Mr. Linson and he excuses himself. A few feet away stands Eric Schwab, the dark-haired 28-year-old U.C.L.A. film school graduate (''Can you believe it?'' he asks good-naturedly) who selected the Chicago locations. ''We wanted to enter this particular period without any back-lot cheating, get the real look of 20's Chicago,'' Mr. Schwab explains, adding, ''Brian gave me free rein.'' The visitor nods, moves toward the ornate doors of the elevator that are just opening and punches two. The unmistakable aura of work recently completed fills the murky, cable-strewn second-story hallway. A burly man wearing a windbreaker on which Paramount's snow-clad mountain logo rises above the words ''The Untouchables'' throws a glance worthy of a Capone bodyguard. The adjoining elevator doors are just closing as majestically as a stage curtain on a star. De Niro/Capone is slipping away as the visitor descends quickly to the lower level. At the far end of the grimy cab tunnel a large car is heading up the ramp into the night. A few days later in a chill, cavernous warehouse on the West Side of Chicago, dozens of extras fill a ''holding area'' near the full-size two-tone green courtroom built for Capone's climactic trial for tax evasion. Mr. DePalma stands in the well of the court, radiating a zone of rarefied calmness, almost peacefulness, that envelops the cohorts of technicians, assistants and gofers who crowd the closed set. No press, no photographers; Mr. De Niro insists on a closed set. ''I have to concentrate intensely,'' Mr. DePalma says later of his disciplined tranquillity. ''I have to see what is going to show in the picture. This is a business in which you can photograph your mistakes. And I feel everything that's going on around me - how the actors are, even whether the camerman had a bad night. I can't allow any of those distractions to affect the work. Directing resembles conducting a symphony orchestra, because you must respect the score, hear the brasses and the strings, even appreciate what the players are feeling, and bring all these elements together.'' The director, whose graying hair and beard give him the look of a pensive Risorgimento statesman, is the keeper of Mr. De Niro's concentration as well as his own. ''Bobby is very humble and will wait a half hour before complaining,'' he says. ''But I can see a sudden movement of distraction in his eyes when people who shouldn't be there get into his sight lines. That's when I have to clear the set.'' Mr. De Niro, head down, bustles into the courtroom as assistant directors position the extras who serve as courtroom spectators and reporters. The visitor cranes his neck, but De Niro/Capone hunches over the defense table, turning his face quickly away. He is ex-athlete stocky in a close-fitting gray pin-stripe suit, and his hairline has been raised (''Two inches,'' whispers Mr. Linson appreciatively). The slightly thinned hair is flat and shiny as seal skin. But he is immediately obscured by a middle-aged, worried-looking lady with a comb and scissors who is making last-minute adjustments. Next to her a tall, craggy man bends down to examine Mr. De Niro's makeup as gravely as a plastic surgeon. ''Bobby's own people,'' an aide explains. ''Both from Italy. And Richard Bruno from New York designs all his clothes. He's the first one he thanked when he won the Oscar. An 85-year-old tailor in Little Italy makes the costumes for all his pictures.'' Mr. DePalma calls for quiet, and the actor playing the prosecutor walks toward the witness box. Mr. De Niro, even though not in the scene, seems a presence, elusive and magnetic, reacting in character as scenes are repeated over and over. He shoots his gold-linked shirt cuffs, whispers behind his hand to his attorney, switches position to show only his right profile, just as Capone did to conceal the famous scars on his left cheek. Father Mulloy always said that it was hard to get a good look at Capone because grateful Chicagoans were always giving him standing ovations for providing bootleg beer in Prohibition's dry years. ''And,'' another old-timer remembers, ''he kept reporters happy with booze and dames, and only killed other gangsters, mostly.'' At a subsequent luncheon, the production designer Patrizia Von Brandenstein, who also worked on ''Amadeus'' and ''Ragtime,'' radiates an artist's sensibility as she describes her approach to the film's mythic setting. ''Brian said not to concern myself with what really happened, but to be true to the time,'' Ms. Von Brandenstein says. ''It isn't just what's 'real' but what the collective 'we' think is real. Our view of the Prohibition era in Chicago is of a great legend, somewhat like that of the West created by John Ford. I have a primary response to a set of visual circumstances. Green, other than black and white, is the color of this movie. It is the color of greed, the color of Chicago in the 20's. Capone was a Neapolitan, and I chose colors for his apartment from the Commedia - robin's egg blue, ochre and malachite green - full-blown, everything acidic and the moldings a Roman gold, giving a wonderfully lurid effect. The Police Department is valued in black and white, and the other domestic colors are all tertiary. It is as if the color were all leached out by the evil sucking the life out of the city. The bad guys are in vivid colors. Frank Nitti is dressed all in white. He is the angel of death.'' A few yards from the courtroom, the elaborate set of Capone's apartment is marble, gilt and blood red, thick with operatic ornament, and at its center stands a throne-like barber chair. The visitor savors its flamboyant decadence and returns to the courtroom set. Mr. De Niro is no longer at the defense table, but the day's newspaper carries a rumor that he has installed a barber chair in his hotel suite and that he is visited regularly by a manicurist and shoeshine man. Every morning the barber from the nearby Drake shaves him and swathes him in the kind of steaming towels that Capone once enjoyed. ''Eighty percent of these rumors,'' a production aide says, ''are untrue.'' Rumors about Mr. De Niro continue to be reported. He wears a cap all the time to conceal his freshly plucked scalp; he and Sean Penn have been spotted in local jazz clubs; he's getting to like the barber chair in his suite and never goes out; Capone lived quietly, too. A man searching for the past could stroll up State Street to Holy Name Cathedral and seek out the bullet scars in its granite facade from a shoot-out there in the 30's. Or glance directly across at the parking lot where Dion O'Bannion's florist shop once stood and where he fell under a fusillade of bullets among the horseshoe-shaped funeral sprays. Capone is still out there somewhere . . . . Back in the West Side warehouse, Capone's trial is coming to an end. Under Mr. DePalma's benign gaze the temper of the courtroom has grown taut as the familiar story is retold. The gangster's ledgers have been deciphered, and his rigged jury has been supplanted by another. The defense attorney changes Capone's plea to guilty and the courtroom erupts around the scowling De Niro, who is beginning to seethe under the press of events. Kevin Costner as Eliot Ness, moving out of the court, leans over the simmering defendant, whispers something in his ear. Mr. De Niro reacts explosively, the carefully assimilated quirks and rages of Capone, everything from Movietone clips to the feel of silk underwear and the imperial barber chair that went into the carefully constructed character, kept under menacing control until now, breaks through in a startling pyrotechnic display. He lunges, hurling threats at Ness, and the bodyguards reach across the railing to restrain him. The full psychopathic force of the gangster, stripped of superficial charm, rivets the attention of everyone on the set. A wild malevolence has been set loose, the real Al Capone is here. ''Cut,'' Mr. DePalma finally calls, breaking the tension, calling Mr. De Niro back out of character. Everybody takes a deep breath. Father Pat Mulloy might well have smiled approvingly.
