634|1987\01\04|FROM 'NAPOLEON' TO MOZART TO SINCLAIR LEWIS|'The Adventures of Robin Hood' Produced by Tim Brooke-Hunt. Animation by Warwick Gilbert. Music by Mark Isaacs. 1985. Lightning Video. 50 Minutes. $19.95. Purists may be scandalized: the producers of this new animated version of the Robin Hood chronicle have pitted Little John against Robin Hood in a wrestling match, instead of the fabled bout with quarterstaves.|'The Adventures of Robin Hood' Produced by Tim Brooke-Hunt. Animation by Warwick Gilbert. Music by Mark Isaacs. 1985. Lightning Video. 50 Minutes. $19.95. Purists may be scandalized: the producers of this new animated version of the Robin Hood chronicle have pitted Little John against Robin Hood in a wrestling match, instead of the fabled bout with quarterstaves. 'The Adventures of Robin Hood' Produced by Tim Brooke-Hunt. Animation by Warwick Gilbert. Music by Mark Isaacs. 1985. Lightning Video. 50 Minutes. $19.95. Purists may be scandalized: the producers of this new animated version of the Robin Hood chronicle have pitted Little John against Robin Hood in a wrestling match, instead of the fabled bout with quarterstaves. (Could it be, judging from the production's flat television animation by Australia's Burbank Films, that the clashing staves were too expensive to render?) Reassuringly, the other elements of the Robin Hood legend have survived intact in this latest dramatization of life in the greenwood with the band of merry men. The production is nicely designed and wittily written. And it boasts another, not inconsiderable, asset: some wonderful voices, most notably those of Robert Colby's hearty Robin Hood and Helen Morse's endearing Maid Marian. Video cassettes are generally available in VHS and Beta. Some titles are also available in the 8-millimeter format and on LaserVision video disks. Unless otherwise specified, prices cited are the manufacturer's suggested retail price for a VHS cassette; rental rates vary from store to store. HOME VIDEO
