635|1987\01\04|ASSEMBLYMAN STANELY FINK: Quotes From the Speaker; LEaving Behind a More 'Independent' Legislature|AS Governor Cuomo was in mid news conference last Tuesday evening, glowing over the approval of mass-transit aid for New York City, Assembly Speaker Stanley Fink came in the back door.|AS Governor Cuomo was in mid news conference last Tuesday evening, glowing over the approval of mass-transit aid for New York City, Assembly Speaker Stanley Fink came in the back door. AS Governor Cuomo was in mid news conference last Tuesday evening, glowing over the approval of mass-transit aid for New York City, Assembly Speaker Stanley Fink came in the back door. He circled the room. And when all eyes had turned away from the Governor and toward him, he announced, ''I came to find out what you politicians are doing about my high taxes.'' The room erupted in laughter and applause -the final moment in the Albany spotlight for the 50-year-old Mr. Fink, who retired last week after 19 years in the Legislature, 8 of them as Speaker, to devote himself full-time to practicing law. It was a telling moment, capturing not only his wit but also his quiet rivalry with the Governor. Mr. Fink, a Brooklyn Democrat, tends to talk in signals, and the signals of the moment seemed clear - that this was his last day of glory and he did not like Mr. Cuomo's stealing the show, that the transit aid was a legislative as well as a gubernatorial achievement. In an interview with Jeffrey Schmalz, chief of the Albany bureau of The Times, the Speaker reflected on his tenure in Albany.  On the power of the Legislature:> The thing I think has happened over the last couple of years - and it may have nothing to do with me, time will tell - this Assembly has become a more independent body. And by independent, I don't mean obstructionist. I mean it has become a body which is capable of initiating and promulgating, rather than just reacting to the executive branch of government, which had been the case in New York State for a number of years. That's important for those of us who believe the more checks and balances one has in government, the greater the possibility to prevent tyranny and for that government to prevail. We were able to work with another branch of the Legislature which was controlled by another party and together, both houses, we made our voices heard. And I think that's new in New York State. Whether that becomes a legacy, I don't know. But that's what pleases me the most when I think about the last 8 or 10 years.  On the size of the Assembly staff, which Mr. Fink used to generate reports and recommendations independent of the Governor's:> I think we gained power in the Assembly leadership because of our substantive knowledge of the issues of the day, and much of that knowledge came from our staffs and our commissions. I'm convinced that power in government, more than anything else, is knowledge, knowledge of the issues and knowledge of solutions. We gained knowledge of substantive issues and we were exhaustive. And that knowledge brought power.  On former Gov. Hugh L. Carey, with whom Mr. Fink had frequent public disputes:> I think we had a clash of leadership styles. A lot of it had to do with relations between his staff and my staff. I had, and have, a great respect for his intellect. He's still one of the smartest people I ever met in government.  rrxhOn Governor Cuomo:> Governor Cuomo's management style is such that we have not had to flex muscle the last few years. Governor Cuomo respects the power of the Legislature and doesn't try to trample on it, so, with one or two exceptions, you never had any need for confrontation. I think everyone understands the Legislature has taken back some power and respects it. Remember that as lieutenant governor, Mario Cuomo witnessed the acrimony between the legislative and executive branches under Governor Carey.  rrxhOn the quality of government:> I think the quality and caliber of people coming into government has gone up over the years. There are different problems confronting government now than there were 20 years ago -the problems become more complex as people's rightful expectations grow. Twenty years ago, people were debating whether health service was a privilege or a right, and now we know it's a right. So now, the questions are: How do you figure out what to deliver and how to deliver it? People's expectations grow and government's responsibility is to meet those expectations.  rrxhOn criticism of Mr. Fink for working, while still Speaker, at a law firm that does business with the state:> It bothers me that I got myself into a position where I was set up, where I set myself up, for what I think were articles that were unfair. I think maybe once I came to the point where I realized for personal reasons, personal financial things, I should have made a decision then either not to practice law or not to stay in government. I'm not too sure what I would do if I had it to do again. I know I've conducted myself in an honorable way, but I'm not too sure I would do the same thing again because of the appearance.  rrxhOn what needs to be done: I wish we had put together a better housing program over the last few years. I think one is beginning to emerge now. The one thing that most concerns me is that when we go to sleep each night, there are more and more people who slip below the poverty line and go to bed each night hungry. Are we doing enough to reverse that trend? Is it us? Is it the Federal Government? Does it matter whose fault it is? It's a fact, the gap between the haves and the have-nots is growing. It's alarming. It's going to have to be addressed.
