636|1987\01\04|FROM 'NAPOLEON' TO MOZART TO SINCLAIR LEWIS|Abel Gance's 'Napoleon.' Presented by Francis Coppola. Music by Carmine Coppola. Tinted and toned. 1927. MCA Home Video. 3 hours, 55 minutes (two casettes). $79.95. The magnificence of Abel Gance's silent-film classic remains indestructible. It survives even when reduced to the comparatively paltry dimensions of this video version, a print-down of the film as reconstituted by Kevin Brownlow and presented in 1981 by Francis Coppola with a new score by Carmine|Abel Gance's 'Napoleon.' Presented by Francis Coppola. Music by Carmine Coppola. Tinted and toned. 1927. MCA Home Video. 3 hours, 55 minutes (two casettes). $79.95. The magnificence of Abel Gance's silent-film classic remains indestructible. It survives even when reduced to the comparatively paltry dimensions of this video version, a print-down of the film as reconstituted by Kevin Brownlow and presented in 1981 by Francis Coppola with a new score by Carmine Abel Gance's 'Napoleon.' Presented by Francis Coppola. Music by Carmine Coppola. Tinted and toned. 1927. MCA Home Video. 3 hours, 55 minutes (two casettes). $79.95. The magnificence of Abel Gance's silent-film classic remains indestructible. It survives even when reduced to the comparatively paltry dimensions of this video version, a print-down of the film as reconstituted by Kevin Brownlow and presented in 1981 by Francis Coppola with a new score by Carmine Coppola. Seen on the small screen, ''Napoleon'' is certainly not what it is when seen in a movie palace like Radio City Music Hall, but neither is it a sacrilege. The visual details are occasionally so tiny as to be virtually indecipherable, yet the power of Gance's epic vision is such that it has the effect of expanding the possibilities of the conventional television set. This is true even though Gance's technical innovations require that the images in the video version, in order to reproduce the film's grand, three-screen finale, become smaller at the very point that the theatrical film reaches its Cinerama-like conclusion. To accommodate Gance's triptych, the three panels are presented as a broad band across the center of the television screen, with approximately a quarter of the screen left blank at top and bottom. ''Napoleon'' is no ordinary historical film. It's a pledge of allegiance to the tricolor, as well as a mystical, revisionist paean that uses virtually the entire vocabulary of the cinema - intense closeups, long shots, cross-cutting between simultaneous actions, dissolves, superimpositions and a single screen that's sometimes split into as many as six or eight different images. Gance sees Napoleon as ''the father of the revolution'' in a series of scenes and tableaux of a grandeur that still take the breath away. Highlights: Napoleon's flight from Corsica cross-cut with the Paris convention's attack on the revolution's moderates, the siege of Toulon, the Victim's Ball, and the Italian campaign that ends the film. Note, too, Gance's use of tinted film stock (blue, green, rose, yellow, etc.), which has absolutely nothing in common with ''colorization.''  HOME VIDEO
