637|1987\01\04|Families Fail Along with Their Farms|WINTER is a stark time in the nation's countryside. The fields, so full of green life and golden promise last summer, are dark and empty now, and resting. The winds are here. The nights are long.|WINTER is a stark time in the nation's countryside. The fields, so full of green life and golden promise last summer, are dark and empty now, and resting. The winds are here. The nights are long. WINTER is a stark time in the nation's countryside. The fields, so full of green life and golden promise last summer, are dark and empty now, and resting. The winds are here. The nights are long. The farming cycle is continuing as it has for generations, and farmers are paying annual bills as they traditionally do during the year-end holidays. But in the fifth year of the worst agricultural depression in a half-century, farmers and townspeople alike are feeling the fraying of bonds and assumptions and values that long sustained them. The Middle West has historically been the nation's balance wheel, producing the food, the workers, the inventions, the exports and half of the Presidents since the Civil War, including two of the last three. The ideal of the close-knit, hard-working family achieving independence and social standing has its roots in the agrarian reality of the 1800s. The family is still the foundation of American farming. Ninety-seven percent of all farms are operated by individuals, couples or partnerships that typically involve close relatives. Corporations - most of them family-held - run just 3 percent of farms. But the number of farms fell 9 percent from 1975 to 1985, and the number of farms with less than $20,000 in yearly sales fell by over 60 percent. Thirty percent of farms are owned by people over 65 years of age, and only 6 percent by people under 35, indicating a flight of the farmers of the future. Professors and politicians have argued and bargained and compromised for decades over the needs of agriculture. The Government has assembled an array of esoteric and costly Federal programs, And yet, along the back roads of the Middle West, many farmhouses stand empty and dark; small towns are freckled with boarded-up stores. These are mute evidence of the forced migration of many families to a new way of life in the cities, leaving the land to be rented, often by their former neighbors, from corporate mortgage-holders. Rural organizers who are working for new programs to protect family farms contend that such absentee owners cannot have the family's sense of stewardship of the land. The human cost of the economic restructuring is high. Farm crisis hotlines are busy with calls from frightened people asking for legal advice on how to keep the land that, in many cases, has been in their family for generations. Reluctantly, many families are also looking for help in coping with alcohol or drug addiction, physical abuse or suicide threats. Last spring the rural suicide rate in Minnesota equaled the urban rate for the first time. Occasionally, too, individuals strike out violently against others. In December 1985, a financially troubled farmer here in Lone Tree walked into the local bank to cash a check. The teller knew the man. Not so long ago, that would have been enough security. But small-town banks have been troubled, too, in these difficult times, and threatened livelihoods breed caution. The check was not approved. Within an hour that farmer, once an affluent pillar of the community, had killed his wife, the bank president and a neighbor. He committed suicide in the cab of his pickup truck. Apart from the violence that makes headlines in the cities, the evidence of social decay is quietly mounting. ''We're swamped,'' said Peter Zevenbergen, who runs a mental health clinic near here. Overworked professionals now concentrate on training cadres of ''peer listeners,'' men and women who volunteer to combat the isolation of despair by listening to neighbors' troubles and fears. Sondra Schweneker, one such volunteer, got involved when she noticed that her rural Illinois neighbors no longer waved to each other on the road. Joan Blundall, a counselor in northwest Iowa, tells countless stories of social and financial stress: the young family that lives on $9,000 a year and works 16 hours a day, and is fighting to keep even that hard life; the families who stop attending church in financial embarrassment; the men who played on the same high school football team but now never speak; the teenager who refuses to answer the telephone. He fears, she says, that the caller will want his father and that he will find the man a suicide out in the barn. She says she has found a common theme in the nightmares of many youngsters there: the image of huge, noisy trucks coming to haul away not only the family's goods but also the parents. NO END IN SIGHT FOR ANNUAL HARVESTS OF DEBT
