638|1987\01\04|THE YEAR IN REVIEW: The Region; A Joyful Celebration But Pain and Division, Too|EVEN IN ITS DULLEST YEAR - and that is a deceptive adjective indeed when speaking of New York - this city presumes its centrality to the nation and the world. If it matters to us, the supposition goes, then it must matter to you. And in 1986, the events from baseball in a Queens stadium to hardball in a Connecticut courtroom justified the municipal ego.|EVEN IN ITS DULLEST YEAR - and that is a deceptive adjective indeed when speaking of New York - this city presumes its centrality to the nation and the world. If it matters to us, the supposition goes, then it must matter to you. And in 1986, the events from baseball in a Queens stadium to hardball in a Connecticut courtroom justified the municipal ego. EVEN IN ITS DULLEST YEAR - and that is a deceptive adjective indeed when speaking of New York - this city presumes its centrality to the nation and the world. If it matters to us, the supposition goes, then it must matter to you. And in 1986, the events from baseball in a Queens stadium to hardball in a Connecticut courtroom justified the municipal ego. Which is hardly to say that all of them were welcome. One clearly was: The Liberty Weekend celebration. With tall ships and fireworks, with Elvis impersonators by the hundred and foam-rubber diadems by the thousand, the city threw the 100th anniversary party for Miss Liberty. As revelry, Liberty Weekend was outstanding, but it was something more; it attested to New York as a living city of immigrants, of Haitian cabbies and Greek cooks and Indian news dealers. New York in 1986 counted more than 2.3 million foreign-born residents, approaching the high registered in 1930. Less than four months after Liberty Weekend, the city had another cause to rejoice, as the Mets captured their first World Championship since 1969, defeating the Boston Red Sox in a spellbinding seven-game World Series. A record 2.2 million fans swarmed to a victory parade in lower Manhattan, and, this being the computer age, rained not ticker tape but printouts down on their heroes. New York needed the uplift and diversion of the Mets, for their championship season coincided with the city's worst political scandal in years. Until early 1986, the Koch administration had built a reputation on being, if the city's most abrasive mayoralty in recent history, then also its most honest. All that began to crumble Jan. 10, when Donald R. Manes, the Queens Borough President, was found slumped at the wheel of his official car, dazed and bleeding from slash wounds to his wrist and ankle in what he later admitted was a suicide attempt. It seemed sadly appropriate in this age of image that as the scandal began to break open, Mayor Koch was on a talk show with Joan Rivers, promoting his new book. The Mayor survived the revelations guilty of nothing worse than oversight or ignorance, but around him collected resignations, convictions and a suicide. Mr. Manes fatally plunged a kitchen knife into his chest in early March, three days after his friend and political ally Geoffrey G. Lindenauer had pleaded guilty to racketeering and mail fraud charges dating to his term as deputy director of the parking agency in 1979. Mr. Lindenauer in turn emerged as the star witness in the fall trial of Stanley M. Friedman, the Bronx Democratic leader, unfolding a story of six-figure bribes from vendors seeking business with the bureau. After eight weeks of testimony, a jury in New Haven found Mr. Friedman and three other defendants guilty of a variety of corruption charges. It made for a busy season for United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani, who commuted between the Friedman case in New Haven and the Manhattan prosecution of eight Mafia leaders. A jury found all of the defendants guilty of operating a ''commission'' that ruled the Mafia throughout the United States. Beyond its broad drama, the trial offered what was perhaps 1986's highlight in stating the obvious: defense lawyers for the mob leaders acknowledged that an entity called the Mafia exists. In late December, a mob of a different sort in Howard Beach, Queens, beat three black men, chased one into the path of a car that fatally struck him - and brought New York to a moment of reckoning on its race relations. Even as three white teen-agers were charged with second degree murder in the attack, there was an act of retaliation by blacks. A gang in Jamaica, Queens, set upon a white waiting for a bus, punching and kicking him as some assailants chanted, ''Howard Beach, Howard Beach.''
