639|1987\01\04|THE YEAR IN REVIEW: The Nation; A Feeling of Uncertainty Moves Across the Land|THE EARLY REAGAN YEARS constituted an epoch of confidence regained in the United States, but 1986 had more of a feeling of uncertainty. It began with the horrifying explosion of the Challenger space shuttle and ended with the Presidency mired in the kind of problem that Ronald Reagan hoped the country had left behind in the Nixon and Carter years.|THE EARLY REAGAN YEARS constituted an epoch of confidence regained in the United States, but 1986 had more of a feeling of uncertainty. It began with the horrifying explosion of the Challenger space shuttle and ended with the Presidency mired in the kind of problem that Ronald Reagan hoped the country had left behind in the Nixon and Carter years. THE EARLY REAGAN YEARS constituted an epoch of confidence regained in the United States, but 1986 had more of a feeling of uncertainty. It began with the horrifying explosion of the Challenger space shuttle and ended with the Presidency mired in the kind of problem that Ronald Reagan hoped the country had left behind in the Nixon and Carter years. In between, there was more than the usual amount of change and challenge as the beginning of the end of the Reagan era hove into view. When the Challenger disintegrated in an awful fireball over Florida in January, disintegrated on live television, it administered a shock to the national psyche that went far beyond grief over the loss of seven young lives and sympathy for the bereaved. This, after all, was something that we were good at, something that we were destined to be good at. The President promised that ''nothing ends here,'' an investigative commission recommended changes that are now taking effect and there will be more shuttle flights. But most Americans will never be as sure as they used to be that all will more or less automatically go well. Then, too, in a year when the nation (perhaps a bit vaingloriously) celebrated the Statue of Liberty and all that it symbolized for generations of immigrants, Washington finally faced up to the fact that something had to be done about the new waves of immigrants who come not legally to help people an empty continent but illegally in search of a shred of economic hope. A new law prohibits the employment of illegal aliens and offers legal status to many illegal aliens already here, but it provides no long-term answer to the question: what do you do about the accident of geography that has given one of the richest countries on earth a border thousands of mile long with one that is very poor? Many of the Mexicans who sneak into the United States end up working in agriculture, and the farm culture of the United States was also under heavy pressure in 1986. With exports falling and the seemingly inconsistent 1985 farm bill causing problems, a pall of despair fell across the farm belt. Foreclosures in such states as Iowa and Minnesota helped revive the dormant debate on the future of the family farm and also to give the Democrats victory in the race for control of the Senate. Two of the key races, those in the Dakotas, produced victories for young Democratic critics of farm policy. The election in November, probably Mr. Reagan's last as an active particpant, showed that he has in six years redefined the terms of political debate in this country, but it also showed that his special electoral magic is untransferrable. He stumped in 22 states, but he lost control of the Senate because he could not hold enough of the voters who backed him in 1984. On the other hand, Republican gubernatorial victories in such big, growing states as Florida and California gave the party some imposing building blocks for 1988. By then, the Reagan era in the White House will be almost over, but Mr. Reagan's influence will still be felt elsewhere in Washington, perhaps most keenly at the Supreme Court. The retirement of Chief Justice Warren E. Burger gave the President the chance to place his ideological imprint ever more deeply on the Court, and he did so by advancing William H. Rehnquist to Chief Justice and naming Antonin Scalia to succeed him. Since Mr. Burger is also a conservative, the changes represented no seismic change in the court's balance, but Mr. Scalia's, especially, is expected to prove a highly influential voice. Quite apart from politics, the old year saw unsettling developments in the social arena - the sharp rise in the number of cases of AIDS, with no sign of a cure yet on the horizon; the explosive increase in the use of crack, a cocaine derivative, and the deeply felt conflict between many American Roman Catholics and the Vatican. In each case, uncertainty caused fear, or at least apprehension, that undercut to an undefinable degree the general mood of national self-confidence.
