640|1987\01\04|THE YEAR IN REVIEW: The World; Terror and Arms Deal, But Also Hopes of Peace|THE ANCIENT RHYTHMS OF warfare and peacemaking, of catastrophe and reconstruction, of subjugation and liberation ran through 1986 like the powerful crosscurrents of a weary sea. The danger and the hope of modern times seemed concentrated in this span of a year.|THE ANCIENT RHYTHMS OF warfare and peacemaking, of catastrophe and reconstruction, of subjugation and liberation ran through 1986 like the powerful crosscurrents of a weary sea. The danger and the hope of modern times seemed concentrated in this span of a year. THE ANCIENT RHYTHMS OF warfare and peacemaking, of catastrophe and reconstruction, of subjugation and liberation ran through 1986 like the powerful crosscurrents of a weary sea. The danger and the hope of modern times seemed concentrated in this span of a year. In a contradictory spirit of conciliation and suspicion, the nuclear superpowers restored some peripheral elements of detente but failed to find enough common ground to conclude a treaty limiting or cutting strategic arms. Their competition around the world magnified regional conflicts, fueling ethnic, religious and national strife in parts of Africa, Asia and Central America. Iran, revealed as the clandestine recipient of arms from the Reagan Administration, continued its grinding war with Iraq in one of the world's strategically crucial regions, the oil-rich Persian Gulf. Each side in that war received support from both the Soviet Union and the United States: Soviet arms to Iraq, East European and North Korean arms to Iran; American arms to Iran, American intelligence information to Iraq. Israel and Jordan groped inconclusively toward accommodation, falling short of an agreement to negotiate formally on the future of the West Bank but managing an unstated policy of coordination in overseeing the occupied territory. Terrorism, the angry weapon of the weak, found targets in Europe, the Middle East and elsewhere, provoking the United States into air strikes on Libya, which Washington accused of aiding the attackers. The war in Nicaragua, conducted by rebels with American weapons -supposedly purchased partly with profits from the Iran sales - bled the Central American country without changing its pro-Soviet political orientation. Guerrillas in Afghanistan, also with some American arms, continued to resist the Soviet war against their mountainous nation, despite incremental moves in the diplomatic sphere toward a possible settlement. The most serious nuclear accident in history occured at the Soviet Union's Chernobyl power plant, spreading radioactive fallout across wide stretches of Eastern and Western Europe. Simultaneously, Mexico City residents began to rebuild from a devastating earthquake that struck them late in the previous year. While racism remained the ruler in an increasingly turbulent South Africa and Gen. Augusto Pinochet kept his grip on Chile, authoritarian leaders were ousted in Haiti and the Philippines, bringing the first, fresh scent of democracy to Haiti and reinforcing the democratic impulses of the Philippine people. Political opposition revived in South Korea, and students demonstrated for democracy in China. For the United States, confident in its democratic ideology, the forces of history appeared to be running more favorably than a decade ago, in the immediate shadow of the Vietnam war. To the Soviet Union, preoccupied with Mikhail S. Gorbachev's attempts to reform the domestic economy, the world may have looked more adverse, particularly with the quagmire of Afghanistan and the elusive nature of arms control, Moscow's premier foreign policy goal. The gains made at Mr. Reagan's meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland, with Mr. Gorbachev were not enough. The high politics played against the background of constant individual suffering, of starvation in parts of Africa and deep poverty in most of the world, corrosive hardships to which the rich and powerful nations of the globe devoted little attention and practically no significant resources. And ultimately, the kaleidoscope of the year's events was reflected in individual human faces - of despairing, emaciated children and of rejoicing political prisoners newly freed. These included Andrei D. Sakharov, Anatoly B. Shcharansky and Yuri F. Orlov, three of the Soviet Union's prominent dissidents. And two other men stood juxtaposed: Kurt Waldheim, the former Secretary General of the United Nations who was elected President of Austria even after his wartime membership in Nazi organizations was exposed, and Eli Wiesel, the eloquent Holocaust survivor who won the Nobel Peace Prize. ''Sometimes we must interfere,'' Mr. Wiesel said. ''Wherever men or women are persecuted because of their race, religion or political views, that place must - at that moment - become the center of the universe.''
