642|1987\01\04|UNLIKELY CASTING CAN REWARD ACTOR AND AUDIENCE|It happened when audiences watched Jane Fonda bask in a bathing suit in ''On Golden Pond,'' and it will happen again when they see her get out of bed in ''The Morning After,'' Sidney Lumet's nimble and very entertaining new thriller: a moment of detachment, a pause during which the viewer inevitably thinks more about the real Miss Fonda than her role.|It happened when audiences watched Jane Fonda bask in a bathing suit in ''On Golden Pond,'' and it will happen again when they see her get out of bed in ''The Morning After,'' Sidney Lumet's nimble and very entertaining new thriller: a moment of detachment, a pause during which the viewer inevitably thinks more about the real Miss Fonda than her role. It happened when audiences watched Jane Fonda bask in a bathing suit in ''On Golden Pond,'' and it will happen again when they see her get out of bed in ''The Morning After,'' Sidney Lumet's nimble and very entertaining new thriller: a moment of detachment, a pause during which the viewer inevitably thinks more about the real Miss Fonda than her role. Gee, but her legs look great. She's in such good shape that even her feet look trim. No question about it, those workouts pay off. And incidentally, isn't she just a little too fit for Alex Sternbergen, a.k.a. Viveca Van Loren, the run-down, alcoholic actress she's supposed to be playing? Yes, definitely. So the audience's attention will be drawn to the artifice through which this fine performance of Miss Fonda's is achieved. Her hair is bleached a weak, frowzy shade of blonde, and she often appears in glaring light that ages her greatly; in the early scene that shows her waking up from a night she can't even remember, she pantomimes a hangover so monumental that the daylight actually hurts. A makeup wizard has given her runny, bloodshot eyes, and Miss Fonda herself supplies the harsh voice, the proclivity for little lies and the messy, unstable temperament that the role requires. Still, she's somewhat out of place. She was even out of place in ''On Golden Pond'' playing Henry Fonda's prickly daughter - and she was Henry Fonda's prickly daughter, after all. That Miss Fonda appears to be playing against type here is no detriment to ''The Morning After.'' As a matter of fact, it's part of the fun. It's a reminder that actors need not be wholly credible to be effective, and that a performance need not be stylized or abstract to make good use of a certain inherent falseness. Playing against type, as Miss Fonda did in ''Klute'' and again does here, can be a risky business: it can mean Sylvester Stallone playing a country singer (as he did in ''Rhinestone'') or Bill Murray as a mystic (''The Razor's Edge'') or Mary Tyler Moore as a sheltered, stay-at-home young wife (''Just Between Friends''). But this kind of chancy casting, when done well, has unexpected advantages. It becomes a way of including the audience in the fiction being constructed, of inviting viewers to share and enjoy the deception to which they are privy. Used cleverly, this kind of unlikely casting becomes a confidence that the audience and the film makers can share. ''The Morning After'' has a shrewd, smart-talking screenplay (''She's got a record - assault with a deadly weapon. Did you know that when you married her?'' ''It's why I married her''). It also has an attractively light touch, but what really holds the interest is the playful sparring that links Miss Fonda with Jeff Bridges, who plays a redneck ex-policeman very much her junior. The gamesmanship extends well beyond the two actors and their roles here, since in addition to fooling one another they are also fooling us. Every film star brings the memory of other roles to each new one, but those echoes needn't always be powerful. They are, though, for Mr. Bridges, who - as in ''Against All Odds'' and ''Eight Million Ways To Die'' - is once again playing the hard-boiled but implacable suitor in a story of intrigue. That he manages to bring such a different physical style to each role is part of the enjoyment of watching him; the awareness of those earlier performances actually heightens this one instead of undermining it. It's especially true with Miss Fonda that the memory of earlier roles, particularly the more prim ones, adds an extra dimension to the more dissolute woman she plays here. If in ''Klute'' Miss Fonda took a more defiant posture, almost daring the audience to accept her as a prostitute, in ''The Morning After'' she takes a more relaxed, playful approach. If you're willing to believe that Jane Fonda would live on cigarettes and Thunderbird, the film seems to say, well, let's see what else you can be talked into. Blythe Danner isn't any less at home as an old-fashioned Jewish mother than Jane Fonda is as a dissipated ex-starlet, but it's almost an even match. In ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,'' which is one of the few Neil Simon works to adopt an explicitly ethnic tone, Miss Danner is certainly an unexpected presence. She brings not the least bit of built-in ethnic style to a role that could so easily be played as a caricature. As the kind of high-strung, hard-working, proudly ascetic parent whose nagging is her most visible means of showing affection, she seems to be newly inventing what could have been a stock character. There's a little dialect, which is not the most successful part of the performance, and there are a few standard mannerisms. But most of the character is less automatic, growing out of Mr. Simon's dialogue and Miss Danner's forthright, unfettered interpretation. The mother, her overworked husband and her widowed sister are all played by actors of no distinct ethnicity. Miss Danner, Judith Ivey and Bob Dishy have been neutrally cast, and by some lights even miscast. But for that very reason, they allow Mr. Simon's memories of a Depression-era Jewish household to stand on their own. By contrast, Jonathan Silverman fits like a glove into the role of the story's wisecracking young protagonist. This feels more like typecasting, and more like overkill. In Oliver Stone's ''Platoon,'' a key bit of casting against type provides the film with one of its boldest strokes. The film's young protagonist, Chris Taylor, finds himself torn between two rival sergeants, the vicious, amoral Barnes and the saintlyElias, two friends whose sharply contrasting codes of ethics eventually bring them into conflict. The players Mr. Stone has chosen for the roles are Willem Dafoe, a fine actor whose handsome face is so menacing that he has inevitably been cast (in Walter Hill's ''Streets of Fire'' and William Friedkin's ''To Live and Die in L.A.'') as the scariest of villains; and Tom Berenger, a nice-guy type. The hitch is that Mr. Dafoe plays the saint and Mr. Berenger, made up with disfiguring facial scars, plays the unprincipled killer. The eventual confrontation between these two would have been shocking anyhow, but it is made all the more so by this casting coup. Both of these usually-typecast actors emerge from ''Platoon'' with whole new careers in store, and both perform brilliantly in their surprising roles. Even better, the entire fighting unit of ''Platoon'' is made up of actors cast against the familiar war-film conventions, which contributes greatly to the uniqueness of ''Platoon'' within that genre. By contrast, the Marine unit in Clint Eastwood's ''Heartbreak Ridge'' is exactly what might be expected, the usual band of misfits and miscreants who are whipped into shape by a sergeant (Mr. Eastwood) who's determined to make men out of them. The big guy is big, but he turns out to be no match for the sergeant. The small, feisty, rebellious type (Mario Van Peebles) turns out to be the best raw material in the bunch. Et cetera. Finally, there's Richard Gere, an actor who seems to bring a certain built-in attitude with him to whatever roles he plays. This isn't star quality, exactly, but it's a self-conscious aloofness that makes his King David peculiarly like his American Gigolo. In ''No Mercy,'' however, Mr. Gere appears to be approaching his role as a Chicago policeman somewhat differently. It's a tough-guy part, but the tough guy wears his heart on his sleeve, particularly after he falls in love with the beautiful blonde (Kim Basinger) to whom he has been handcuffed, a blonde who is the moll of a Louisiana gangster. Mr. Gere seems to approach this character more openly and emotionally than he does most, to be playing against his own self-proclaimed type. And the results are refreshing and unexpected. In production notes for the film, Mr. Gere cites the late John Garfield as an influence, and that admiration is apparent on the screen, in the less studied, more spontaneous and distinctly un-Gerelike poignancy that he brings to this seemingly hard-boiled role. Incidentally, the film's director, Richard Pearce, has also cast the gangster's role a bit unexpectedly and done it with perfect elan. The part is played by the Dutch actor Jeroen Krabbe, normally a much more sophisticated type who makes a very stylish figure here. Yes, the gangster does disembowel his victims, after all. But Mr. Krabbe sees to it that he stands elegantly straight, wears a formidable-looking outfit and coolly addresses those he is about to knife as ''my friend.'' So the nastiest of roles is cast unpredictably, and played with unanticipated flair. FILM VIEW
