644|1987\01\04|THE FACES THAT HAUNT VAN GOGH'S LANDSCAPES|In the paintings ignited by the brush of Vincent van Gogh during the last 15 months of his life, rational and irrational are welded together. The more artistic control van Gogh gained, the more control he seems to have relinquished. The fiercer and more masterly his grip became, the more he appears to have to placed himself in the hands of something else.|In the paintings ignited by the brush of Vincent van Gogh during the last 15 months of his life, rational and irrational are welded together. The more artistic control van Gogh gained, the more control he seems to have relinquished. The fiercer and more masterly his grip became, the more he appears to have to placed himself in the hands of something else. In the paintings ignited by the brush of Vincent van Gogh during the last 15 months of his life, rational and irrational are welded together. The more artistic control van Gogh gained, the more control he seems to have relinquished. The fiercer and more masterly his grip became, the more he appears to have to placed himself in the hands of something else. In the radical work he produced during his year-long asylum in Saint-Remy in the south of France, van Gogh was at the same time master and slave, shepherd and flock, sower and soil. ''Van Gogh in Saint-Remy and Auvers,'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through March 22, focuses on van Gogh's capacity for reason. Still reacting against the myth of van Gogh the mad artist, Ronald Pickvance, the art historian and curator of the exhibition, draws attention to the artist's cultivation, his fidelity to nature and the lucidity with which he painted and saw. At Saint-Remy, and then, to a lesser degree, in the northern French village of Auvers, where he spent the last three months of his life, van Gogh's powers of discernment and organization are unmistakeable. But reason alone does not explain why this show is both exhilarating and terrifying. Of the issues that suggest the problem in distinguishing between the rational and irrational in van Gogh's work, none has more urgency than the one of ''secondary imagery.'' The phrase refers to images that are rarely noticed at first glance, that refuse to get lost once they are found, and whose meaning, importance, or role is hard to define. Van Gogh's landscapes are inhabited. What faces and heads are doing in his trees and clouds, whether they were intended - and indeed whether they are even there - are questions that can mobilize impressive rational and irrational resources. What cannot be denied after this show is that these faces and heads exist. There are different kinds of secondary images in this show. Some are so distinct that it may not be appropriate to describe them as secondary. Of these the best known may be the maternal or fetal cloud shape floating across the ''Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background.'' The ghostly, carnival, cloud head at the upper right of ''A Corner of the Asylum Garden'' - which seems almost to have been shot out of the amputated tree in the foreground like a circus performer from a cannon - is clear. So is the cloud face that seems to be in the process of swallowing the sky at the far right of ''Cypresses,'' like the mouth of Hades gorging itself in Durer's ''Four Horseman of the Apocalypse.'' There are also full figures. In a 1985 article in the magazine ''Pantheon,'' the art historian Yvonne Korshak argues for the existence of a trumpeter and other Last Judgment images in the clouds and fields of ''Crows Over the Wheatfield.'' To the right of the ''Mountains at Saint-Remy,'' nestled in the hillside like a ''Slave'' of Michelangelo asleep within his stone - but also protective of the proud little army of trees and flowers marching alongside the road - there appears to be a reclining figure. If it brings to mind reclining nudes, it also suggests a painter with palette. The most expressive and revealing of the secondary images may be the heads and faces in trees. Van Gogh's identification with trees grows out of, but goes far beyond, Corot. Indeed the foliage in van Gogh's paintings is so alive, so much a cauldron of primal energy, darkness and light, that it shoots us back to the ages of animism and tree worship described by James George Frazer in ''The Golden Bough.'' It is in the trees that we see most clearly the degree to which van Gogh personified and projected himself into the natural world. In the ''Olive Orchard'' from the Vincent van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, there is an impaled head near the center, as blind as a mole and baring its teeth like a frightened horse. There are faces in profile, mouth open, hair pulled back, in the great ''Pine Trees with Setting Sun.'' This may be the most Chinese work in the show, and Chinese landscape painting, inspired by natural philosophy, has been inhabited by secondary images for centuries. The most startling head is in ''Cypresses.'' The head is, in fact, the entire front cypress. It is facing left, its mouth near the bottom, a nose above it, an eye higher and near the center. It is the head of a pariah, almost a leper, and it seems both stuck in the earth like Bluebeard in the sand, and planted as an offering to the gods. Once the head is recognized, the aggressiveness of the mouth to its immediate right takes on new meaning. Now it is this vulnerable head, not the sky as a whole, that seems threatened. What is also important here, since it argues for van Gogh's awareness of this soundless cry, is that in the drawing made after the painting, the head of the tree is even clearer; the other cypress in the drawing now suggests a head as well. In the ''Road with Cypress and Star,'' one of the last paintings van Gogh did before leaving Saint-Remy, the big cypress also suggests a head. It is scruffier and less defined than the head in ''Cypresses,'' but it brings to mind van Gogh's self-portraits. It resembles a huge piece of flint against which the sun and moon rub together, and it seems to be on fire. There are also different kinds of secondary imagery in ''Olive Tree with the Alpilles in the Background.'' In the tree just below the maternal cloud there is a head facing left. The head is the foliage. With its mouth open, it seems to be howling like a wolf, or nibbling leaves like a deer, or preaching to the cluster of trees around it. Here, as in ''Cypresses,'' the play between the more literal and the more hidden secondary images transforms a landscape into a stage of astonishing drama. Secondary imagery is a messy and controversial subject. In part because there is almost no preparation for it in any form or period of art history, with the notable exception of Surrealism, it is easily mocked and abused. The strong reactions it provokes expose the profound ambivalence about artistic control that is characteristic of this culture's relationship with art. On the one hand, scholars, collectors and members of the art public tend to be attracted to art because it touches aspects of experience that may be unavailable or unwelcome in daily life. Precisely because so little room can often be made for that experience, however, there is at the same time a need to believe that art is not really outside daily convention. Scholars may insist that art can be grasped historically or analytically; collectors may assume they can tame art by pinning it to a wall. The secondary imagery in van Gogh suggests the force of the emotional and psychological currents running through rational channels built to contain them. In the process it reminds us how subversive all great art is. Nevertheless it should be easier to deal with secondary imagery in van Gogh than in Cezanne, the other late-19th-century artist in whose work it is prominent; secondary images are also present in paintings by the third member of the Post-Impressionist triumvirate, Gauguin. Van Gogh has never been identified with reason. Cezanne, on the other hand, is still seen primarily as the father of Cubism, the progenitor of one of the most analytical approaches in the history of painting. If the expressionist, mystical side of Cezanne's work were more clearly acknowledged, Cubism might be seen differently, perhaps as an attempt to transform the turbulence, instability and passion in Cezanne's paintings into the syntax of a new language. Many reasons can be offered why secondary imagery is prominent in this show. It is not there in anywhere near the same degree in the paintings van Gogh did prior to his breakdown in Arles in December 1888. If that crisis further dissolved the skin between himself and his environment, it also left him more isolated. At Saint-Remy his friends really were the trees, fields and hills. If they were his community, his parish, they were also his tempters and judges. It cannot be surprising then that he painted the natural world as an embodiment of his affections and fears. Van Gogh was also more alone artistically. When he left Arles and went to Saint-Remy, his style changed. After his crisis with Gauguin, he stopped painting in the broad, flat color areas that had been characteristic of Gauguin and his friends. Indeed in the asylum he stopped painting like anyone. His wavy, choppy, whiplash strokes no longer have the regularity of Impressionist brushwork. The laws of traditional composition were referred to but invariably broken. The way van Gogh worked encouraged the release of a newer and older content, more primitive, more irrational, the kind of content that had traditionally been controlled by academic and systematic means. There are numerous signs that van Gogh knew what was going on in his work. In the 1880's there was a growing tension between a Realist commitment to the visible world and a Symbolist commitment to an invisible world beyond or behind it. The work of Odilon Redon, an artist on good terms with Gauguin, was filled with disembodied heads attached to natural forms or floating in space. The artistic climate was such that once van Gogh noticed heads knocking at the door of his work, he would have been encouraged to invite them in and hear their story. In some paintings in Auvers, there is also a sense that van Gogh was trying to use secondary imagery to regain an inspiration that he never had to struggle for in Saint-Remy. Swollen, caricaturish heads seem to be talking to each other, like two of Daumier's parliamentarians, from the far left and far right of ''Daubigny's Garden'' (from the Hiroshima Museum of Art). But van Gogh himself does not seem to have found their conversation all that engaging. Like the Auvers paintings in general, these heads seem somewhat contrived - perhaps an attempt to project himself into the landscape, to create an identification that was no longer naturally there. Or perhaps they are not only laughing with each other, but at him, in which case they are as disturbing as any of the heads in Saint-Remy. Whatever van Gogh's secondary images may be, they make us feel the heat of his extraordinary creative fire. ART VIEW
