65|1987\01\01|GOLIC IS STRONG POINT FOR BROWNS|Bob Golic, the Cleveland Browns' nose tackle, is one of those athletes who was given a second chance in the National Football League and made the most of it.|Bob Golic, the Cleveland Browns' nose tackle, is one of those athletes who was given a second chance in the National Football League and made the most of it. Bob Golic, the Cleveland Browns' nose tackle, is one of those athletes who was given a second chance in the National Football League and made the most of it. Steroids weren't involved in the quick makeover of Golic from the 235-pound linebacker let go by the New England Patriots to the 270-pound nose tackle voted to the Pro Bowl squad the past two seasons. But steroids were thought about when Golic, who is from Cleveland, joined the Browns on a waiver claim in 1982 and was told he would now play nose tackle. It is a position he has described as ''de-evolution.'' ''I went from a two-legged, walking, upright, thinking human being to a four-legged, crawling, sniveling beast of burden,'' he said. ''The opposite of Darwin's theory.'' Power-Lifting Helped Golic at the time asked the strength coach, Dave Redding, ''Shall I take something?'' Redding said he would not condone steroids, so Golic suggested instead a diet of ''Twinkies and a lot of beer.'' Redding, however, introduced him to his first intense power-lifting program and his playing weight went from 235 to 255 and on to 270. Said Golic today, as the Browns finished three days of practice here at Dodgertown for their playoff game Saturday against the Jets, ''I'm comfortable at 270, half quickness, half ballast.'' The 29-year-old Notre Dame alumnus has many opinions - including some about steroids. ''I hope they do start getting some kind of steroid testing,'' he said. ''It would make my job a lot easier. There are guys around the league that you know are using something because there is no way they could look like that. They look like somebody pumped them up with an air hose.'' 'A Matter of Pride' If the ban on steroids was followed in the N.F.L., Golic said, ''There would be a lot of offensive linemen playing indoor soccer next year. They'd look like raisins. ''Obviously, the people who are doing the steroids have a mentality that is wrong because they are trying to push themselves past a point that is natural for them. ''I look at it as a matter of pride. If I took steroids, and I got big and I got strong and I got fast and I went out and I made the Pro Bowl, I might be happy. ''But I would also know that is wasn't me. It wasn't natural. I had to do something unnatural to get there. That would be hard to accept, but of course there are guys who can. They got there and that's all that matters.'' With the Browns, Golic has come a long way. He started as a nose tackle for the first time against the Los Angeles Raiders in the 1982 playoffs and soon met Gene Upshaw, the 6-foot-6, 275-pound guard who is now director of the players' union. Golic called for a pass-rush switch that had him looping around from the outside. ''I come around the corner and I think, 'Hey, this is going to be easy.' '' he said. ''But Upshaw's standing back there. It looks like he's been waiting a week, waiting for me. ''I think about all these moves I'm going to make on him. I put my head down and drive into his chest. He didn't move. I immediately went from a 6-3 to a 6-2 nose tackle.'' Golic improved quickly, and by the end of the 1983 season he was voted a Pro Bowl alternate. This season was another good one but it lacked one element. ''I didn't get any quarterback sacks,'' said Golic. ''I had my hand on the guy a few times and I told the coaches to give me at least a half-sack. No. ''One of our guys said, 'If you'd had just one sack you might have been defensive player of the year.' '' Golic is good enough so that opponents see to it that he is blocked at least twice and sometimes three times. ''I get hit from all directions,'' he said. ''That's my job.'' Golic likes his head coach, Marty Schottenheimer, because of his enthusiasm. ''As you get farther along in the game,'' he said, ''you have a tendency sometimes to look at it as a business, go to the office, do your job, go home, get the paycheck. ''Being a Notre Dame guy, I'm into the rah-rah, let's get fired up. Marty brings an emotionalism to the game. ''It's not the screaming and yelling which he does sometimes. You can see him when he's talking, the muscles in the jaw tighten, the eyes get a little wet. You can see the emotion there. This game means everything. That gets me going. And there's a bunch of other guys who feel the same way.''  N.F.L. PLAYOFFS
