650|1987\01\04|NEW YORKERS, Etc.|THERE are those who say that New Year's resolutions serve no purpose, but they are, without equivocation, wrong. It's very comforting, the last week or two of December, when such things usually take place, to resolve to do good things. And it matters not one whit if these resolutions are broken, abrogated, kaput, the first day or week of the new year.|THERE are those who say that New Year's resolutions serve no purpose, but they are, without equivocation, wrong. It's very comforting, the last week or two of December, when such things usually take place, to resolve to do good things. And it matters not one whit if these resolutions are broken, abrogated, kaput, the first day or week of the new year. THERE are those who say that New Year's resolutions serve no purpose, but they are, without equivocation, wrong. It's very comforting, the last week or two of December, when such things usually take place, to resolve to do good things. And it matters not one whit if these resolutions are broken, abrogated, kaput, the first day or week of the new year. Nevertheless, there are some, cognizant of the frailty of their wills, who do not wish to tempt even further disillusionment. They refuse to make personal resolutions, although, all things being equal, they like to start the new year with a positive perspective. One of the best ways of doing this is by paying tribute to other people who, with or without the aid of resolutions last year, did unto others what should be done by a lot more. LET'S take cyclists, for example, a group that, with some reason, became more unpopular as each month went by, and remains so. But despite this, there were cyclists who not only knew that they were subject to traffic laws but also obeyed them, and who appreciated, too, that their vehicles could be dangerous. So it's only fair to offer thanks to those men and women on bicycles who didn't speed ahead at red lights, who didn't swoosh around corners and who didn't cavalierly zip along in the wrong direction on one-way streets. And a rose or an apple or something nice to motorists, taxi drivers included, who made an effort to avoid splattering pedestrians with dirty water during rainstorms. They may not always have succeeded, but at least they tried, by slowing down when they spotted enormous puddles. And perhaps most important of all, they didn't forge ahead as though pedestrians standing at the curb were invisible. And may the passengers get nicer, and the tips get slightly bigger, for the nine or 10 taxi drivers who actually said ''thank you'' when they were given a tip. A nod in the direction of mothers on subways and buses who didn't give the first available seat to their children, while they remained standing. Or who didn't allow a child to remain seated while a considerably older person stood directly in front. And a nod as well to any younger person who sat in the section reserved for the elderly and infirm and immediately vacated the seat when it was needed. There's every possibility that these young people will grow up to be decent human beings. THANK you to token clerks who smiled occasionally and who made an effort to speed things up when a train was pulling into the station. And to bus drivers who responded politely when asked where the bus was going, rather than blaming passengers for the shortcomings of bus signs. Major appreciation to repairmen who telephoned if they were going to be more than 20 or 30 minutes late for an appointment, a sign that they and/ or their employers appreciated that other people's time was at least as valuable as their own. Whatever you want may you get, all you salesmen and women who broke off personal conversations when a customer came into sight, and all of you who remained equally pleasant after discovering the transaction was an exchange, rather than a purchase. At least a small bonus to store and bank managers who made some effort to find out what was going on ''out there.'' Who emerged from their offices to see for themselves how long it took customers to get looked after and, if the time was inordinately long, why, and how the situation could be remedied. A promotion to company executives everywhere who, every so often, personally looked through the complaint files assembled by their customer-relations departments. A TRULY heartfelt thank-you to hospital attendants who directed their irritation and job frustrations at the proper authorities, rather than at often helpless patients. An entry in the entertaining hall of fame to hosts and hostesses who respected guests' diets and refrained from plaintive remarks such as ''this is my specialty - just try a little,'' or such generalized comments as ''be good tomorrow.'' Dieting is hard enough without the added burden of being made to feel ungrateful. AND an entry in everyone's personal hall of fame for people encountered only occasionally who didn't assume you knew who they were. They came up at parties, or on the street, and began the conversation with ''Hello, I'm Mary (or Tom) Smith and we met a few months ago at the Joneses'.'' Of course, men and women as thoughtful as that were usually remembered anyway, as opposed to those whose greeting was a challenging ''I'll bet you don't remember who I am.'' For that group, there's only one answer - ''No, I don't remember who you are, and now I know why.'' So, it's not very nice. But that's a whole other area, and no way to start a new year.
