651|1987\01\04|MUSIC: FOSS CONDUCTS ROMANTIC GERMAN BILL|IT is the novelties that call attention to the Brooklyn Philharmonic's program this weekend, but at the first of the three concerts Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music -the last is this afternoon at 2 - it was the warhorses that provided the greatest musical satisfaction.|IT is the novelties that call attention to the Brooklyn Philharmonic's program this weekend, but at the first of the three concerts Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music -the last is this afternoon at 2 - it was the warhorses that provided the greatest musical satisfaction. IT is the novelties that call attention to the Brooklyn Philharmonic's program this weekend, but at the first of the three concerts Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music -the last is this afternoon at 2 - it was the warhorses that provided the greatest musical satisfaction. Lukas Foss, the conductor, led off with his oddest card, the apparent United States premiere of Friedrich Nietzsche's ''Hymn to Life.'' This was originally a six-minute setting for chorus and wind band composed by the philosopher to a poem by Lou Andreas-Salome in the early 1880's. It was subsequently expanded for full orchestra (though deferentially; the winds still predominate) by Nietzsche's friend Peter Gast and published in 1887. One spells out this information because the Brooklyn Philharmonic states in both its news release and its program notes that Gast wrote the poem and that Nietszche merely dedicated his composition to Andreas-Salome, which turns out to have been a simple misreading of the score. In any event, Nietzsche's music, in a conservative mid-19th-century Germanic idiom, seems oddly solemn, even turgid, compared with Andreas-Salome's hot-blooded poetical passion. Still, the music might have made a somewhat better impression had the Grace Choral Society of Brooklyn - which sat dutifully onstage for the entire concert but sang only for a total of nine minutes at the very beginning and very end - sung better. In the Nietzsche, especially, the chorus's squally tone and imbalance in favor of the women's voices made a poor case for the music. Mr. Foss continued with the New York premiere of Webern's ''Three Orchestral Studies on a Ground,'' part of a cache of early Webern works discovered by the Webern specialist Hans Moldenhauer. Webern's later works are microcosmically concise; these are three scraps, less than four minutes long - sketches for the subsequent 10-minute Passacaglia (Op. 1) - and really of interest only to other Webern experts. The beginning of Schumann's Piano Concerto announced another level of compositional accomplishment, and the performance justified that accomplishment. Bella Davidovich, the soloist, gave a lovely account of her part, eminently poetic yet never lacking in vitality, and Mr. Foss partnered her beautifully. This was small-scaled Schumann, and one was grateful to hear it in this age of big, gleaming, soulless performances. Mr. Foss's interpretation of Beethoven's Symphony No. 7, which followed the intermission, was equally appealing. Mr. Foss seemed to take his basic tempos, fleet and forward-looking, from Arturo Toscanini. But he modified them slightly, and he softened Toscanini's hard-driven contours. This was another scaled-down performance, never miniaturist, but not overbearing, either. This meant some lovely opportunities for sensitive phrasing from the Brooklyn players, yet the finale built to a most satisfying climax. On paper, to follow the ecstasy of Beethoven's Seventh with the conductor Felix Mottl's orchestration of a three-minute Beethoven song, ''Die Ehre Gottes aus der Natur,'' looked like pure anticlimax. It didn't turn out that way. Mottl, who also orchestrated four of Wagner's five ''Wesendonk Lieder'' (Wagner had already done the fifth), knew what he was about. His translation of this piano-accompanied solo song into a four-part chorus with vigorous late-18th-century-style orchestra sounded like it belonged in one of Haydn's late oratorios. It made for sturdy, satisfying fare, heartily handled by the Grace Choral Society singers, and it provided a delightful and unusual conclusion to a most venturesome program.
