653|1987\01\04|VIOLENCE IN INDIA REVIVES OLD FEARS|A wave of violent protest over regional, religious and linguistic grievances has flared in different parts of India in recent weeks, reviving some old concerns about the difficulties of national integration.|A wave of violent protest over regional, religious and linguistic grievances has flared in different parts of India in recent weeks, reviving some old concerns about the difficulties of national integration. A wave of violent protest over regional, religious and linguistic grievances has flared in different parts of India in recent weeks, reviving some old concerns about the difficulties of national integration. Although the incidents have been isolated and apparently unconnected, political analysts suggest that the protests have been wider in scope and more violent than others in the last few years. The violence, coinciding with the last weeks of 1986, have inspired a series of introspective year-end editorials and public comments in the Indian press. Many commentators wondered, for example, whether the problem involving Sikh secessionists in the northern Indian state of Punjab may be spreading as agitators for other causes become increasingly militant. #600 Deaths in Punjab ''If the Government is perceived as being too tough toward protesters, it provokes a reaction,'' a Western diplomat said. ''If it is perceived as too lenient, that provokes a reaction, too. Either way, the Government loses control.'' According to official figures, more than 600 people were killed in violence in the Punjab in 1986, many of them in spectacular or gruesome massacres carried out by extremists demanding an independent nation for Sikhs. Among the recent episodes in other parts of India were several days of riots last month by agitators demanding statehood for Goa, a tiny former Portuguese colony on India's western coast. The army had to be called out at the height of the winter tourist season to restore order. Before the Goa riots, Moslems in the nearby state of Karnataka went on a rampage in protest over a short piece of fiction printed in a local newspaper. Separate State Urged The short story was called ''Mohammed the Idiot,'' which Moslems deemed extremely offensive. Seventeen people were killed as rioting spread through the cities of Mysore, Bangalore and several smaller towns within a few days. Violence continues, meanwhile, as ethnic Gurkhas in northeastern India agitate for a separate state to be known as Gurkhaland. There have been almost daily reports of new killings in demonstrations and pitched battles among workers on the area's tea plantations. In the southern state of Tamil Nadu, protesters against the use of Hindi as a national language have set off bombs and held mass demnstrations, leading to the detention of as many as 19,000 people. Thousands of farmers and their organizers were arrested in December in the western state of Maharashtra while trying to block roads in an agitation for higher farm prices. Hundreds of Groupings Meanwhile, news organizations reported that more than 100 people died in 1986 as tribal separatists in the remote northeastern state of Tripura clashed with ethnic Bengali plains dwellers. From the time of independence in 1947, India has had difficulty forging a sense of national unity out of its hundreds of ethnic, linguistic, religious and regional groups and subgroups. Language has been an especially explosive issue, boiling over into serious riots two decades ago among ethnic Tamils in Tamil Nadu, where there was talk of secession two decades ago. The history of such conflicts has led aides to Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi to caution against drawing any conclusion that India is suddenly coming apart at the seams. Dangerous Trends Seen In an interview, an aide to Mr. Gandhi noted that the language agitations in Tamil Nadu had not even approached the level of those in the 1960's. He said that other problems in Goa, Karnataka and elsewhere were isolated in nature. ''In this country, it takes very little to start a new round of ethnic violence because tensions are always beneath the surface,'' he said. ''We have to keep things in perspective.'' But critics of Mr. Gandhi say his Government may be ignoring some dangerous trends behind the violence. Perhaps the most serious of these is the way that it seems to have spread so quickly as to suggest that it was highly organized. 'Determined Professionals' The Moslem protest over the short story in one city in Karnataka state, for example, touched off immediate similar protests elsewhere. There were even clashes between Moslems and the police in the faraway Moslem-dominated state of Kashmir in the north. ''In the earlier days, rioting tended to be spontaneous,'' said Rajni Kothari, a leading civil liberties advocate in New Delhi. ''What you're getting now are a bunch of determined professionals backed by hired mobs.'' For Mr. Kothari, two separate waves of violence in the last few years foreshadowed this trend. First were the anti-Sikh riots in the nation's capital after the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by two Sikh security guards in 1984. Some 2,500 Sikhs were killeed in those riots, and Mr. Kothari and others have long charged that they were organized or encouraged by leading politicians allied with Mrs. Gandhi and her son and successor. These politicians deny the charges. A Police Crackdown Next came the violence involving Hindus, Moslems and lower caste groups in the western state of Gujarat in 1985, where 250 people died over five months. The killings stopped abruptly after the police cracked down on what they said were organized groups seeking revenge on each other. As in many of the recent flare-ups, the police blame ''antisocial elements'' and ''miscreants'' for fomenting the violence.
