654|1987\01\04|RIVERA MURAL IN MEXICO AWAITS ITS NEW SHELTER|MEXICO CITY, Jan. 1 -|MEXICO CITY, Jan. 1 - MEXICO CITY, Jan. 1 - Lounging in the central park, or alameda, of a Mexican village, gossiping with friends and purchasing snacks from a pushcart vendor is a favorite way to pass a Sunday in Mexico, even in crowded Mexico City, where the central park is a particularly beautiful one. As a small boy, Mexico's great muralist Diego Rivera went to Mexico City's alameda on a Sunday, lounging with his parents, just as hundreds of people do today, nearly a century later. A decade before he died in 1957, Diego Rivera painted a large fresco called ''Dream of a Sunday Afternoon in the Central Alameda,'' in which the trees of the park embrace a Rivera-esque fantasy. Painted in the Hotel del Prado across the street from the alameda, the mural embraced the centuries of history the park had seen, from the Spanish Inquisition to the Mexican revolution. The mural has been in the hotel ever since, first in the dining room and then in the lobby. The hotel, once a fashionable tourist spot but a bit in decline in recent years, was seriously damaged during the earthquakes that struck Mexico City 15 months ago, killing thousands of people and destroying hundreds of buildings. The hotel came close to collapsing and has been closed ever since, but the mural survived with only a few tiny cracks. Mural Moved 100 Yards Although the timing was a bit of an accident, park loungers were treated to a unique spectacle three weeks ago, just six days after the master's 100th birthday. Mr. Rivera's mural, all 77,000 pounds of it encased in foam rubber, wood, and steel girders to hold it rigid, was extracted from a second-floor lobby window of the del Prado by an enormous crane and loaded onto a flatbed truck. The truck carried it ever so slowly and gently 100 yards to a new site where the mural was settled onto a concrete platform, the workers treating the giant apparatus as if it were filled with thousands of eggs. In the coming months, a building will be built around it and a salon created. There, government art conservationists hope, the mural will remain permanently, and safe from earthquakes, a national artistic treasure that all who come to the alameda can view. As did so many of Mr. Rivera's murals, the alameda mural instantly generated heated controversy because the artist, an avowed atheist and Communist, tucked away a small scroll in the work that said, ''God does not exist.'' Historians recount how demonstrators stormed the hotel and slashed the fresco, which Mr. Rivera repaired. In 1956, little more than a year before his death, Mr. Rivera made peace with the Roman Catholic Church and changed the wording on the scroll to merely reflect the 19th-century meeting at which a Mexican politician had spoken the words. After making the change, he descended from the scaffold and told waiting reporters, ''I am a Catholic.'' More Than a Year of Study ''We knew the day of the earthquake that regardless of what happened to the hotel the mural would have to be moved,'' said Juan Urquiaga, a Government architect who is head of the Office of Architecture and Conservation of National Artistic Heritage. ''We've spent more than a year studying the problem and getting ready for the move.'' Mr. Rivera, who was paid 512 pesos per square meter for his work - or about $4,300 for the entire mural -painted the fresco on a bed of plaster placed in a heavy steel frame. It measured 49 feet 3 inches by 15 feet 9 inches and was one of the last great murals he painted. The frame is mounted within a massive system of steel girders, held together by a forest of steel-girder bracing so that the mural is not subjected to any twisting movements that might crack the plaster. The weight of the work confounded the architects and engineers in the last year as they pondered the mural's future. ''Everyone felt it should be next to the alameda, or at least very close to the alameda,'' Mr. Urquiaga said. ''We considered placing it in the Fine Arts Palace, but the columns of that building are too close together.'' Another government museum behind the fine arts building and a block from the alameda had a second-floor salon long enough to accommodate the mural. But when engineers began studying the 19th-century building, they had visions of the mural, girders and all, crashing down to the first floor should someone slam a door too hard, or during Mexico City's next earthquake. Eventually, it became clear that the government would have to build a structure. Another hotel across the street from both the Hotel del Prado and the alameda did collapse during the earthquake. In its place, the government built another park. The adjacent site where the hotel parking lot stood was vacant, and this was chosen for the mural. Earthquake-Proof In the weeks prior to the move, while workers labored amid the ruins of the second-floor lobby of the del Prado to prepare the mural, other workers hurried to lay the concrete foundation of a new building. They prepared a pedestal 50 feet long and 5 feet wide onto which the mural would be lowered by the crane and fastened in place. The plan is to build the walls and roof of the salon around the mural, solving the problem of maneuvering the unwieldy object through a door or window of some other structure. Moreover, by constructing the salon with enough structural steel to satisfy the designer of any modern bank vault, Diego Rivera's masterpiece will be earthquake-proof. At the del Prado, a platform was built extending out of the second-floor lobby window into Juarez Avenue. Dozens of steel casters were placed under the mural. On the day of the move, the crane pulled the mural out of the hotel onto the platform and then lifted it onto the truck for the trip to the new foundation. ''Our biggest problem was avoiding the possibility of any torsion when the mural was moved,'' Mr. Urquiaga said. ''But the steel structure is so well braced, we don't think there will be any damage.'' But it will likely be several months before the art conservationists find out if they succeeded. For the move, the face of the mural was covered with cloth, polyurethane cushioning material and then a sturdy wooden cover. That will remain in place until the salon is completed and there is no danger of bad weather affecting the fresco. ''We will remove the cover, clean the mural and repair any cracks. Our hope is there will be no cracks beyond the few small ones that resulted from the earthquake,'' Mr. Urquiaga said.
