655|1987\01\04|FRANCAIS IS SPOKEN ON SUBSCRIPTION TAPES|From the heartland of country music comes Champs Elysees, a taped radio program that offers French music and stories instead of country and western tunes and banter.|From the heartland of country music comes Champs Elysees, a taped radio program that offers French music and stories instead of country and western tunes and banter. From the heartland of country music comes Champs Elysees, a taped radio program that offers French music and stories instead of country and western tunes and banter. The program, which is produced by a company owned by Wes Green, is taped on two cassettes a month and mailed to 3,500 subscribers around the country. ''Bonjour, c'est Champs Elysees,'' says Georges Lang, an announcer for Radio Luxembourg (RTL), a French-language station based in Luxembourg that can be heard in France and Belgium. Mr. Lang began one tape with a synopsis of stories on the French in Lebanon, a Jacques Cousteau oceanic museum, a history hot line, a clinic for damaged paintings, a recipe for pigeon with foie gras and truffles, and French theater. The tape is peppered with French pop tunes and is aimed at anyone who wants to hear a show in French. For the most part, the subscribers are French students and universities. ''Language-lab tapes are so boring for the most part,'' Mr. Green said. ''One of the real problems with learning language here is that it is so terribly remote. There's nothing exciting about it. But foreign culture is interesting.'' Glossary Accompanies Tape A transcript and an English glossary accompany the tape to guide the listener through idioms and historical and cultural references. At the University of Chicago, Champs Elysees has been more than an exercise for students over the last two years, said Gerald Honigsbloom, director of French-language instruction. ''I go back and forth between here and Paris to run our education-abroad program, and with the tape here I find myself quite up-to-date on the political and cultural scene,'' Mr. Honigsbloom said. ''It has the compelling quality of a living document.'' Champs Elysees tapes have been broadcast on the campus radio station, Mr. Honigsbloom said. Mr. Green, a former disk jockey at WSM and WLAC in Nashville, said the idea originated three years ago when a former company of his, Nashville Radio Workshop, was sending Grand Ole Opry broadcasts to RTL. ''I worked out a deal with Georges Lang,'' Mr. Green said. ''I asked him if he'd be willing to do the programs.'' Three hundred subscribers received the first tapes from the company, which is a family business that Mr. Green, his mother, Edna, and brother, Mark, co-own. Dominique Laurent, a Vanderbilt doctoral student in French, writes the transcript and glossary with Prof. Jean LeBlanc, a Vanderbilt French instructor, serving as editorial consultant. The format is similar to typical French-language radio news magazines, using background music from classical through new wave to accentuate the rapid-fire broadcast. On the tape, the French is spoken at a moderate pace. The success of the French tape has prompted the company to expand. ''We're starting German this month,'' said Mr. Green, who attended Aiglon College in Montreux, Switzerland, and graduated with a degree in German from Vanderbilt University. A subscription costs $112 for 14 tapes and transcripts, sent from September to March, Mr. Green said.
