656|1987\01\04|Living With Shutter-Speed Limits|ONE of the longstanding complaints about 35-millimeter single-lens reflex cameras is that their shutters can synchronize with electronic flash units only at relatively slow speeds. Back in the dark ages, the top speed was 1/30-second, then it went to 1/60-second. There it rested until a few years ago, when 1/125- and even 1/250-second ''sync'' speeds became possible.|ONE of the longstanding complaints about 35-millimeter single-lens reflex cameras is that their shutters can synchronize with electronic flash units only at relatively slow speeds. Back in the dark ages, the top speed was 1/30-second, then it went to 1/60-second. There it rested until a few years ago, when 1/125- and even 1/250-second ''sync'' speeds became possible. ONE of the longstanding complaints about 35-millimeter single-lens reflex cameras is that their shutters can synchronize with electronic flash units only at relatively slow speeds. Back in the dark ages, the top speed was 1/30-second, then it went to 1/60-second. There it rested until a few years ago, when 1/125- and even 1/250-second ''sync'' speeds became possible. The limitation on shutter speed with flash is caused by the kind of shutter used in 35-millimeter cameras with interchangeable lenses. It is called a focal-plane shutter, and it consists of two curtains that during exposure slide across the rectangular area in front of the film, one chasing the other. As the first one moves, it exposes the film; the second covers it up again. At slow speeds, they move slowly; at fast speeds, they zip across. And when they zip across at very high speeds, the second curtain often begins to follow the first curtain before the first curtain has cleared the film area, creating a slit that moves across the film. Used with a constant light source, the small slit is not a problem. The gap between the two curtains moves across the film plane at a constant size and speed, insuring an even exposure. But if the light is virtually instantaneous, as it is with the light from an electronic flash, only part of the film receives the full exposure at very high shutter speeds; the speeding curtains block off the rest. If you have ever made a flash picture that turned out with a black band on one edge or the other, that is the reason. The design of leaf shutters, which are inside the lens, allows them to function with flash at all marked speeds - usually up to 1/500-second. Makers of focal-plane shutters have long labored to end their flash inferiority complex. They've used titanium instead of fabric to lighten the weight of the curtains, and they've stood the shutter sideways, so the curtains go top to bottom instead of side to side. These innovations account for the 1/125- and 1/250-second top sync speeds found on some current SLR's. But as yet no one has invented a shutter to match the leaf shutter's 1/500-second with flash. There is, however, another way to solve the problem, as Olympus, a camera maker known for its design ingenuity, has discovered. Instead of trying to shoehorn more speed into the shutter, the Olympus designers decided to think about changing the nature of the electronic flash. A typical flash duration is about 1/1,000 second. What, they thought, if it were even shorter, and instead of one burst there were several? From this kernel was born the Olympus F280 flash, the first flash to allow focal-plane shutter synchronization at any speed, even at 1/2,000- second. The F280's flash tube can create brief blasts of light at a rate of 20 kilohertz, or 20,000 pulses a second. The light may not be more powerful than a locomotive, but the continual pulsing adds up at slower speeds. Moreover, the system is mated to Olympus's automatic-flash exposure system, which measures the light off the film. So with either the Olympus OM-4T or the new OM-77AF cameras, proper exposure is taken care of by the electronics in the camera. There always seems to be a hitch in any innovation of this magnitude, and the fly in the F280's ointment is that it delivers less light to the film at fast speeds. This is because the number of pulses of light that hit the film decreases as the size of the slit between the shutter curtains decreases. What if you want to use the flash system but your camera doesn't carry an Olympus nameplate? Chances are excellent the electronics won't mate, so the automatic-exposure feature won't function. What about other Olympus owners? If they have cameras with off-the-film exposure sensing, they can use the F280 in the same way as any Olympus ''T''-model flash, according to the camera maker. Some readers of this column have written me about camera equipment they want to sell or trade. Much as I am interested in such a marketplace, I am unable to provide any bulletin-board space for such exchanges. Nor can I function as a shopping adviser. But I remain eager to hear all comments and suggestions, including questions about picture-taking that might have widespread interest. Please leave last bullet where it is. CAMERA
