657|1987\01\04|NO END IN SIGHT FOR ANNUAL HARVESTS OF DEBT|ALTHOUGH he didn't need to campaign to keep his job last year, Senator Tom Harkin stumped as hard as he had in every national election since his first race for Congress in 1972. What he wanted was new support for his own approach to farm problems. ''There's only one cure for what ails farmers,'' he told audiences over and over, ''and that's a decent price in the marketplace.|ALTHOUGH he didn't need to campaign to keep his job last year, Senator Tom Harkin stumped as hard as he had in every national election since his first race for Congress in 1972. What he wanted was new support for his own approach to farm problems. ''There's only one cure for what ails farmers,'' he told audiences over and over, ''and that's a decent price in the marketplace. ALTHOUGH he didn't need to campaign to keep his job last year, Senator Tom Harkin stumped as hard as he had in every national election since his first race for Congress in 1972. What he wanted was new support for his own approach to farm problems. ''There's only one cure for what ails farmers,'' he told audiences over and over, ''and that's a decent price in the marketplace.'' The only sure medicine, he said, would be Government-mandated cuts in the crops they raise. Administration specialists, meanwhile, were attacking farm problems from a different angle. They want to continue lessening Government intervention in farmers' decisions, by removing incentives for them to add to the mountains of surpluses. One goal was the same on both sides - to reduce the record $25-billion cost of the farm program approved by Congress in 1985. But some farm economists are defending that program, arguing that, with some refinements, it might be the best plan available. In the new Congress that convenes in Washington this week, a great deal of verbal ammunition will be fired in defense of each of those positions. All Americans have a great deal at stake in the outcome, because it will affect not only their tax or food dollars but also the nation's economic growth. With its related industries, from the plow and the seed to the supermarket, agriculture employs 21 million workers, more than any other sector in the economy. Whatever change emerges, if any does, experts say, the results are likely to be costly. The uncertainties are who the heaviest losers are likely to be, by how much, and how the costs are likely to be paid. Hardly anyone has more at stake than the farmers, many of whom have already gone through five years of deepening financial trouble. Their long-term problems arose not so much from the low prices that Senator Harkin decries as from debts. An expansion spree that began in the early 1970's, when the export market was booming, left them owing $200 billion. About $50 billion of that will never be repaid, according to Abner Womack, who heads a study group at the University of Missouri. Farmers who owe it will lose land, equipment and, in many instances, everything. Many Farmers Stay Afloat Of course, not all farmers are in distress. Many with large farms who avoided the debt trap are doing quite well. Those who raise poultry and livestock are profiting from low prices for feed grains. For growers of staple crops - wheat, corn, cotton and rice - a system of benefits offset most of the effects of the price declines that the 1985 law deliberately pursued as a way to make American goods more competitive abroad. Farm prices overall fell 5.5 percent in the past year, the Agriculture Department reported last week; food processors and consumers benefited, but other nations matched the low prices, keeping American exports flat and surpluses high. The 1985 law was designed to raise subsidies in nearly equal proportion to declines in farm prices and to guarantee producers a return close to a preset ''target.'' The target price for corn, for example, is $3.03 a bushel, which experts say is well above the cash cost of growing it in the Corn Belt. To achieve the target, the law provides two types of assistance, a price-support loan and a direct payment. The ''loan rate'' sets a minimum return that the farmer can expect for his crop; this year that minimum in most areas is about $1.80 a bushel. Market prices are lower than that, so most farmers are pledging their corn to the Government in return for $1.80-a-bushel loans. Next, they receive direct ''deficiency payments'' to make up most of the difference between the loan rate and the target price. The law includes an additional subsidy that enables farmers to redeem the corn they pledged as collateral for the loans and to dump it on the market, further depressing prices. Senator Harkin and Representative Richard Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, have offered a plan that they say would strengthen the farm sector while cutting the taxpayers' costs to little or nothing. It would impose sharp cuts in farm production in an effort to achieve the Senator's ''cure for what ails farmers'' -a ''decent price'' well above current levels. The Government would make no direct payments but would set the loan rate much higher, while sharply limiting what a farmer could sell in the United States. The plan's most obvious aspect is that it would transfer the cost of supporting farm income from the Treasury to the marketplace. And critics argue that the heaviest share of the burden, in proportion to ability to pay, would fall on low-income families. ''It would transfer the burden from a progressive tax system to the consumer,'' said Terry Barr, former director of the Agriculture Department's economics staff. As a result, he said, even while they paid more than ever before for their food, many consumers would be forced to choose less expensive varieties. And, he said, jobs would be lost as consumers were forced to eat more of their meals at home and to buy fewer processed foods. ''The effect would be to impose a sales tax on food, which is the most regressive sales tax we use,'' said Marty Strange, a Nebraska economist who is a director of the Center for Rural Affairs, a nonprofit research group. ''It could have a severe impact. The poorest families could be spending half their income on food and still be living on bread and beans.'' However, he noted that the bill's authors ''do try to recognize that by proposing an increase in food stamps.'' And he found ''some merit'' in the plan as a way to manage an inevitable ''disinvestment'' in an agricultural establishment that has overexpanded. Administration farm specialists are advocating a less drastic but more unusual wrinkle on the old farm program. Besides proposing a 10-percent cut in income supports and a $50,000-a-farm limit, they want to ''decouple'' the benefits from the production. In other words, a farmer could receive as much as $50,000 even if he decided to plant a new crop or nothing at all. Now a corn farmer, for example, must keep planting corn to maintain his rights to benefits, whether or not anyone needs any more corn. Some Washington experts are skeptical about the chances of either alternative to current law. One of those is Mr. Barr, the former Agriculture Department official. ''I'm not sure you could get farmers to go along'' with the Administration proposal, he said, because a payment without reference to what they produce is too much like welfare. Of the present program, he said, ''So we spent $25 billion for farm supports. That $25 billion is not all that big when you compare it with everything else in the budget and you consider what it buys. There must have been at least $10 billion of that passed along to consumers in lower food costs.'' Martin Abel, a Washington consultant, agreed. ''Our analysis is that, with refinements, the existing law will look better and better,'' he said. ''At least it is an approach that leads to lower food prices.''  THE TRICKLE EFFECT  How the farm sector is linked to the national economy (1984 figures) *2*Equipment, seeds, Storing, processing, *2*fertilizer & distributing & retailing *2*labor Farm sector farm products Amount Amount Amount of G.N.P. Employment of G.N.P. Employment of G.N.P. Employment* $64.6 2.0 million $65.8 2.7 million $517.6 16.3 million billion jobs billion jobs billion jobs Total contribution to G.N.P.: $648 billion, 21.0 million jobs  HOW 125-MILLION-ACRE REDUCTION WOULD AFFECT THE ECONOMY  A government projection shows how farm policies can affect the larger economy. The hypothetical situation would reduce total crop lands by 125 million acres, or 30 percent, to raise commodity prices. *2*Storing, processing, *2*Equipment, seeds, *2*distributing & re- *2*fertilizer & labor *2*Farm sector *2*tailing farm products Drop Jobs lost Drop Jobs lost Drop Jobs lost* in G.N.P. in G.N.P. in G.N.P. $11.7 $17.7 $34.6 billion 415,000 billion 660,000 billion 1,092,000 Total drop in G.N.P.: $64.0 billion, 2,167,000 jobs lost *includes jobs that stem directly from the farm industry, as that of a grain elevator operator or a vegetable retailer, but not unrelated jobs, such as a local barber or auto mechanic, that may depend on the farm economy.  (Source: Department of Agriculture)
