658|1987\01\04|GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST|A SPRINGFIELD ALTERNATIVE|A SPRINGFIELD ALTERNATIVE A SPRINGFIELD ALTERNATIVE The Elfin Puppet Theater today is offering an alternative to those confining family weekends at home with a performance of ''Toad's Hole'' at the Springfield Science Museum in Western Massachusetts. In the show, a lively investigation of how different animals spend the winter, Toad and his friends are brought to life through the hand of Sarah Elston, who has been entertaining and educating audiences for more than 10 years. Ms. Elston follows her performance with a brief workshop and gives members of the audience a chance to try their hand at puppetry. The show, at 2 P.M., is the first of a Sunday afternoon series for families that lasts through the month. The museum also houses natural historical and technological exhibits, including a dinosaur hall, an aquarium and a planetarium. It is open Tuesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Admission is free; donations are suggested. It is situated on the Quadrangle at the corner of State and Chestnut Streets in downtown Springfield. For information call (413) 733-1194. AFRICAN ART IN PHILADELPHIA A selection of 88 African sculptures, masks and other ceremonial and everyday objects is on display at the Philadelphia Museum of Art. The exhibit, from the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, lasts through Feb. 8. The University Museum has been collecting African archeological and anthropological materials for nearly a century, with particularly rich holdings from Zaire, Gabon, Angola and Nigeria. Most of the carvings are of wood, which was often painted or embellished with copper, brass, nails, beads and animal and vegetable matter believed to have particular significance or magical powers. The oldest objects are believed to be 150 years old. The exhibition is accompanied by an illustrated catalogue written by Alan Wardwell, guest curator, and organizer of the exhibition. The Philadelphia Museum of Art, 26th Street and the Benjamin Franklin Parkway, is open Wednesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Tuesdays for tours only, which leave on the hour. Admission is $4 for adults; $2 for senior citizens, students with identification and children. For information call (215) 763-8100. 'HEROES' IN BALTIMORE Works by 23 of this country's ''outsider'' artists - once described by the French painter Jean Dubuffet as ''heroes and saints of art'' - will be shown at a reception from 5 to 7:30 P.M. Thursday at the George Ciscle Gallery in Baltimore through Jan. 31. In ''American Outsider Art,'' the works on display reveal the creative drives and emotions that motivate these self-taught artists, despite the difficulties under which they frequently worked. Two Martin Ramirez paintings are included; the artist, who was institutionalized in California in 1930 and died there in 1960, began to paint at the age of 63. One of his works on display recently sold for $6,000. The gallery organized the show in tandem with PEP Inc., the state's largest program of support services and vocational training for the deinstitutionalized mentally ill, associated ith Baltimore's Sinai Hospital. It is the opening event in PEP's $5 million fund-raising campaign to establish the first American museum devoted to outsider art. The gallery, at 1006 Morton Street, is open 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Tuesday through Saturday. Admission is free. For information call (301) 837-2787. DANCING IN RIDGEWOOD The Ridgewood Dancers of Ridgewood, N.J., will be engaging in old English country dances Friday at the Unitarian Society in Ridgewood. ''We show the newcomers the different dances we do; it's group dancing, done by couples facing each other in rectangular lines,'' said Byron Buck, the group's president. He said the dancers had live music and a caller, Beverly Francis. The group, which also does contra dancing, an outgrowth of country dancing especially popular with the young, varies in size from 20 to 50 people. The dancing Friday, at the church at 113 Cottage Place, begins at 7:45 P.M. lasts until 10:30 or 11 P.M. Admission is $4. For information call (201) 652-4014.
