66|1987\01\01|Books of The Times; Voice From the Theater|WRITING IN RESTAURANTS. By David Mamet. 160 pages. Viking. $15.95.|WRITING IN RESTAURANTS. By David Mamet. 160 pages. Viking. $15.95. WRITING IN RESTAURANTS. By David Mamet. 160 pages. Viking. $15.95. It was as a child in a Chicago schoolyard that David Mamet first recognized words as ''magical and powerful unto themselves,'' whether used for insult, imprecation, arbitration or, as is the case with the adult Mamet, for dramatic poetry. On the strength of his theatrical body of work, plays that include ''American Buffalo'' and the Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' Mr. Mamet has become one of our most astute and distinctive playwrights. That he is also a fine essayist is a fact that, until now, has been something of a secret. His new book, ''Writing in Restaurants,'' is a collection of articles, speeches, commentaries and introductions to plays, some of which may have been written in restaurants. But there is nothing random about the anthology (and there are no gravy stains on his ideas). Although the pieces deal with such diverse subjects as play-writing, poker, pool halls and family vacations, there is a unifying thread. Above all, Mr. Mamet is a moralist, a man who is dedicated to differentiating truth from trash. Often he returns to Stanislavsky, holding him up as a humanist and a figure of artistic probity. On occasion, the Russian director shares stage space with an ancient seer or a bit of folk wisdom, as in this observation: ''There is a homily popularly attributed to the Chinese to the effect that the time one spends fishing is not deducted from one's life span. This may or may not be true of fishing . . . but it is certainly not true of the theater. The time one spends in a theater - whether as spectator or as worker - is deducted from one's total allotment, and this is what Stanislavsky had in mind when he said, 'Play well, or play badly, but play truly.' '' From Mr. Mamet's perspective, the Philistines have all but destroyed his favored profession. Production, meaning overproduction, has been ''the death of the American theater'' - one reason he continues to find a theatrical sanctuary in writing radio plays. Broadway has priced itself out of presenting new plays; it now costs $750,000 to put on a three-character, one-set drama. Broadening the attack, he adds about the movies, his other major livelihood, ''They aren't administered by Miss Dove, but by people interested solely in making a buck on the buck they have put out.'' The problem, of course, is not simply financial. He sees an instability in the theatrical life of such huge proportion that it supports Camus's comparison of the actor to Sisyphus. While Mr. Mamet and his colleagues push their boulders up the mountain, lurking on the other side are the critics in ambush. Surprisingly, considering his outspoken public statements on the subject, in print he seems to have tempered his hostility. In a speech to theater critics, he advises them to ''write for yourself, and be an artist'' rather than a ''weather vane and reporter to the public taste'' - and tells them how to do it. He is as demanding on the playwright, on himself as playwright, as he is on actors and critics. ''Every time the author leaves in a piece of nonessential prose (beautiful though it may be),'' he writes, ''he weakens the structure of the play.'' It is at least partly as an act of self-criticism for him to state that it is ''much easier to write great dialogue'' than it is ''to write great plots'' - although one must add that there is far more in Mr. Mamet's art than meets the ear. At the same time, still a schoolyard lawyer, he sees the theater as a court of last resort. A play, by his measure, ''is a strict lesson in ethics,'' a definition that finds support in Mr. Mamet's own plays. The Mamet Bureau of Standards and Practices also operates in the world outside the theater. He describes the frustration he felt when he tried to tell a bank teller that she had accidently given him $2,500 after he had deposited a check for that amount (no thanks in banks). His poker passion is detailed (in 20 years of playing he has seen very few poor losers but many poor winners). And he reports, with amazement, that a friend wanted to design a down-filled Hawaiian shirt. A few of the pieces seem peripheral, and one dealing with ''The Cherry Orchard'' leaves some question as to how much he really admires the play. But the author's batting average as a wordsmith is exceedingly high. In this book, Mr. Mamet acts as a teacher, critic and 20th-century transcendalist, resolutely idealistic as he tries to - to use a favorite Mamet word -inculcate awareness. Even dealing with relatively minor matters he can have acute insights, as in his observation that ''only two legitimate national holidays remain,'' times when ''we, as a People, are united'' - the Super Bowl and the Academy Awards. One fantastic story, that of reprisals suffered at the hands of the Dead Man's Lot gang (too long to tell; see page 53), is an object lesson in the limits of altruism. In his Harvard lecture on the subject of ''Decay,'' in and out of the theater, he indicates that identifying a problem does not absolve one of responsibility. ''We are the problem,'' he says, ''like the man driving home from the Hamptons on Sunday night and cursing the idiots who have caused the traffic jam.''
