660|1987\01\04|Lincoln Towers Tenants Ponder Whether to Buy|In the newly decorated lobbies, in the carpeted mailrooms and in the steamy laundry rooms of Lincoln Towers, conversation these days begins and ends with two questions: Should I rent? Should I buy?|In the newly decorated lobbies, in the carpeted mailrooms and in the steamy laundry rooms of Lincoln Towers, conversation these days begins and ends with two questions: Should I rent? Should I buy? In the newly decorated lobbies, in the carpeted mailrooms and in the steamy laundry rooms of Lincoln Towers, conversation these days begins and ends with two questions: Should I rent? Should I buy? The eight buildings in Lincoln Towers, standing along West End Avenue with their balconies stacked like open bureau drawers, are going co-op. In one of the largest and most expensive conversions of apartments to cooperatives in New York City, the 12,000 tenants who live in the 3,800 apartments must decide within the next three months whether to continue renting or to step into the New York real-estate market by buying their apartments. Those who continue to rent may stay in their apartments, which are covered by the city's rent-stabilization law, as long as they wish. Rents now range from $115 a room to $375 a room. Those who decide to buy - at prices well below the market - face a second decision: whether to stay in their new cooperative, or immediately sell it for a large profit. The price for current residents of the complex has been set at $30,500 a room, under an agreement negotiated between the Association of Tenants of Lincoln Towers and the owners - a partnership headed by the Mendik Realty Company and principals of M. J. Raynes Inc. The price for outsiders, however, will be $68,000 a room - meaning that insiders should be able to buy their own apartments and then resell them for a profit of more than 120 percent. By the end of the conversion, real estate valued at $900 million will have been offered for sale. ''I just don't know where I would go,'' said Olga Albizu, who moved into her apartment in 1966 and thinks that she will probably stay on as a tenant. ''I still like New York,'' she said, ''and I'm also concerned that there might be a glut on apartments. I hate to get saddled with a mortgage and I don't really like to owe money.'' When asked why, in that case, she would even consider buying, she smiled. ''Greed,'' she said. Debbie Gold, a young woman who is a life insurance agent, said she had heard that real-estate agents were giving tenants inflated figures on the resale value of their apartments. Other tenants voiced concern that if many people bought their apartments and then tried to resell them, there would be a glut on the market and prices would drop. ''People think their apartments are worth more than they are,'' Ms. Gold said. ''People think they are going to buy and sell in three weeks. Everyone sees dollar signs.'' Sam Paryzer, who operates a telephone company, is thinking about buying not only his apartment but also his outdoor parking space, a treasured commodity on the Upper West Side. There are 400 outdoor parking spaces in Lincoln Towers, which covers 20 acres on both sides of West End Avenue from 66th to 70th Streets, and 1,100 spaces in an underground garage. Mr. Paryzer's parking space will cost him $18,000, plus monthly maintenance that would be raised in yearly increments until it reached $143 a month four years from now. The eight-building complex was built between 1960 and 1964 by Webb & Knapp, a company headed by William Zeckendorf that was one of the country's largest real-estate operations. One of the principal drawing cards of Lincoln Towers is that it is only a few blocks from Lincoln Center. A number of older tenants said in interviews that one of their luxuries was being able to walk to and from performances, even at night, when they said they felt relatively safe because of the Lincoln Center crowds. Tenants, though, are worried about plans announced by Donald J. Trump to build a huge complex of tall buildings between Lincoln Towers and the Hudson River. Gladys Gruenwald, who has a lovely river view from her 18th-floor apartment, says she will probably buy her apartment, Mr. Trump and his view-blocking plans notwithstanding. ''I have a neighbor who has been worrying about the view for 10 years,'' she said. ''I just enjoy it and don't worry about it.'' The owners have agreed to put the building into as good shape as possible before conversion - including the replacement of all windows and all terrace doors, the installation of a new roof on each building and the replacement of all elevator controls. One reason to put the buildings in such good condition, according to a number of tenants, is to avoid ending up with two classes of residents, as has happened in some buildings that have both rentals and co-ops. In those buildings, the rental apartments still have the old drafty windows, faulty heating and dilapidated kitchens, while the newer ones tend to have been modernized by their owners. The improvements were negotiated by the tenants association, which had clout, thanks to 75 percent of the tenants signing a no-buy pledge, according to the association president, Janice F. Hohenstein. Under that pledge, they promised not to buy their apartments unless released from the agreement by the association. Ms. Hohenstein said the population of Lincoln Towers was split between the older tenants, many of whom had moved into their current apartments more than 20 years ago, and younger people with families, who had come within the last 10 years. Sadye Curtis, who is 88 years old and only retired from her work in advertising a few months ago, moved into her three-and-a-half-room, balconied apartment 16 years ago. Her rent was then $286 and is now $575. She could buy the apartment for $101,000, but the kitchen has just been renovated and the apartment is filled with eastern sunlight and memories and she thinks she will just stay on as a tenant. Shira Dicker, a reporter who covers the diamond industry for National Jeweler magazine, moved into her one-bedroom apartment with her husband and newborn baby two and a half years ago. They partitioned off the dining-el to make a baby's room, but they are now outgrowing the space. They would also like to have another child. ''In Manhattan, you have to plan your family around the availability of apartment space,'' Ms. Dicker said ruefully. The family will enter the tenants lottery in which vacant apartments will be offered for sale by the owners of the building at a price somewhere between the insider and outsider prices. Ms. Dicker hopes to get one of the 23 two-bedroom apartments. She says getting such an apartment in the lottery will mean the difference between being able to afford staying on in New York City or moving to the suburbs. ''We're going to enter the lottery and pray and hope,'' said Ms. Dicker, who now lives about 15 minutes from her job in midtown. ''If we don't, it will probably mean that I would join the millions of people who wake up every morning at 6:30 A.M., instead of 8:30 A.M.''  THE TALK OF LINCOLN TOWERS
