662|1987\01\04|PORT AUTHORITY LOSES GRIEVANCE OVER BEARD BAN|Rules that bar Port Authority workers from wearing beards or mustaches are unreasonable and a violation of union contracts, an arbitrator has ruled.|Rules that bar Port Authority workers from wearing beards or mustaches are unreasonable and a violation of union contracts, an arbitrator has ruled. Rules that bar Port Authority workers from wearing beards or mustaches are unreasonable and a violation of union contracts, an arbitrator has ruled. The arbitrator, James Mastriani, has determined that officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey acted improperly when they told an employee at the communications desk of the George Washington Bridge to shave off his beard, according to Ron Trivisonno, president of Local 1400 of the Transport Workers Union. The union filed a grievance last Jan. 13 on behalf of the communications officer, Jack Carren, who was ordered by the bridge manager, Janis Beitzer, to shave his beard. Mr. Trivisonno said the union believed that the regulation was discriminatory because facility operations agents were singled out. Hearing Held in September ''They said it gave a poor image to the public,'' Mr. Trivisonno said. ''We were irate. What about the toll collectors? They see millions of people. And what about Stephen Berger, the executive director of the Port Authority? He's had a beard for years.'' Mr. Berger was out of town on vacation and could not be reached for comment. A hearing was held Sept. 19 and Mr. Mastriani dated his ruling Dec. 22. Mr. Trivisonno said he received it in the mail last Wednesday. Mr. Mastriani wrote, according to Mr. Trivisonno, that the order was ''unreasonable'' because it referred to all facility operations agents, ''regardless of job function or duty'' and violated the contract. A Port Authority spokesman, Joe Lanciotti, said that, as of Friday evening, the authority had not received an official notice of an arbitrator's decision. He said he did not know whether it planned to change the policy or appeal the ruling. According to Mr. Trivisonno, the arbitrator wrote that, until a new policy was negotiated, the employer had a right to prohibit beards for those workers assigned in any capacity in which facial hair constitutes a safety hazard. Another agency spokesman, Armando Arrastia, said the main reason for requiring the facility operations agents to be clean shaven was because they, at times, must wear breathing masks while fighting fires or entering contaminated areas. The ruling does not apply to about 1,000 Port Authority police, but it does apply to the 1,200 toll collectors, tow-truck operators, tunnel workers, sky caps and airport operations agents represented by Local 1400.
