664|1987\01\04|When Politicians Become Authors|ANDREW P. O'ROURKE, the Westchester County Executive, was awaiting the Republican nomination for governor of New York when the public learned he was also a novelist.|ANDREW P. O'ROURKE, the Westchester County Executive, was awaiting the Republican nomination for governor of New York when the public learned he was also a novelist. ANDREW P. O'ROURKE, the Westchester County Executive, was awaiting the Republican nomination for governor of New York when the public learned he was also a novelist. His first novel, ''The Red Banner Mutiny,'' based on a real 1975 mutiny aboard a Soviet naval ship, was published last April by Bantam Books as a $3.50 paperback. The first edition called for 160,000 copies. Two editions have been printed, reports Fred Klein, a vice president and editor of Bantam, who says he ''was a little disappointed.'' ''I frankly thought,'' he explains, ''that the cross-pollination of a novel written by someone running for governor would get more attention. ''We have about 250,000 to 300,000 copies in print - which is good. I thought this could have gone into the 4-, 5-, 600,000-copy category.'' Meanwhile Governor Cuomo, who demolished Mr. O'Rourke at the polls in November, has had ''decent'' success with his pre-election book, ''Diaries of Mario M. Cuomo: The Campaign for Governor,'' according to his publisher, Random House. About 25,000 to 30,000 copies of the $19.95 hard-cover book have been printed, the sales department says. Mr. O'Rourke is writing a second novel for Bantam, ''Hawkwood,'' Mr. Klein notes. It is about a man who is reported to have drowned in an airliner crash in Boston Harbor but who survives and takes on a new identity molded after John Hawkwood, a medieval English mercenary. ''One of Andy's big dreams is: What would happen if you woke up another person?'' Mr. Klein observes. ''He's got a wonderful imagination. He's going to become, I think, an adventure writer to be reckoned with.''  FOLLOW-UP ON THE NEWS
