667|1987\01\04|Bowen Plan Showed Concern for Age's Terrors|To the Editor:  In ''Help Dr. Bowen Conquer Catastrophe'' (editorial, Dec. 15), you had a few well-deserved cheers for the proposal by Dr. Otis R. Bowen, Secretary of Health and Human Services, to add an increment of protection to Medicare with a modest ''catastrophic'' benefit, for a premium of $4.92 a month.|To the Editor:  In ''Help Dr. Bowen Conquer Catastrophe'' (editorial, Dec. 15), you had a few well-deserved cheers for the proposal by Dr. Otis R. Bowen, Secretary of Health and Human Services, to add an increment of protection to Medicare with a modest ''catastrophic'' benefit, for a premium of $4.92 a month. To the Editor:  In ''Help Dr. Bowen Conquer Catastrophe'' (editorial, Dec. 15), you had a few well-deserved cheers for the proposal by Dr. Otis R. Bowen, Secretary of Health and Human Services, to add an increment of protection to Medicare with a modest ''catastrophic'' benefit, for a premium of $4.92 a month. The coverage isn't much, but it's comforting to know that somebody understands how terrifying it is to consider that a single illness could cause whatever you've been able to accumulate in a lifetime to come unglued. I suppose we should have known that Dr. Bowen's proposal wouldn't fly, and as you reported (front page, Dec. 16), one look was enough for the White House policy group. They did not bother about details, but, ''There was general agreement that no further Government support of long-term care expense should be advocated.'' Besides, ''States, through Medicaid and other local programs, already provide substantial resources for long-term care.'' That's after you've sold off your house and everything in it that can be carried away, to pay the medical bills yourself. The White House geniuses and assistant geniuses weren't through yet: ''they reviewed alternatives that would involve a larger role for the private insurance industry and a smaller role for the Government,'' you reported. Then they gave Dr. Bowen, and us, our sermon for the week: ''The role of government, as a rule, should be limited to providing an environment conducive to the efficient functioning of the private market and the exercise of judgment and responsibility by individuals, families and communities.'' Hogwash. What they were really telling us was plain enough: Get lost, Grandpa.  ROBERT CUNNINGHAM Chicago, Dec. 18, 1986
