668|1987\01\04|Academic Freedom Under Fire in Jordan|To the Editor:  Last May 14 at Al Yarmouk University in Irbid, Jordan, there occurred a peaceful demonstration by students over purely academic matters. That night, the students held a sit-in, which led to a military assault by Jordanian security forces. Many students were beaten, then arrested.|To the Editor:  Last May 14 at Al Yarmouk University in Irbid, Jordan, there occurred a peaceful demonstration by students over purely academic matters. That night, the students held a sit-in, which led to a military assault by Jordanian security forces. Many students were beaten, then arrested. To the Editor:  Last May 14 at Al Yarmouk University in Irbid, Jordan, there occurred a peaceful demonstration by students over purely academic matters. That night, the students held a sit-in, which led to a military assault by Jordanian security forces. Many students were beaten, then arrested. At least three were killed (the figure is probably a good deal higher). Soon after, a Government report blamed the university administration for the disturbances, and the president was forced to resign. On July 12, the contracts of 15 professors and 6 administrators were summarily terminated. A ministerial committee found no evidence of subversive activity in the university. The only link between the 21 and their dismissal was that they had shown concern for their students. Al Yarmouk University is run by the Jordanian Government, and so the dismissal of the 21 was intended as a crude punitive device to deter expression of opinion on matters of concern to the university community. Among the professors dismissed are some of the ablest humanists, scientists and social scientists in the Arab world, many with an important international reputation. Their dismissal has meant they face the prospects of no alternative employment in Jordan. All have tried to fight their dismissal on legal grounds, but since their opponent is the Government, none of these means have been successful. As academics and scholars in the United States, we view these measures by Jordan with the gravest concern. For not only have scholars and administrators been dismissed without due process, but also their civil and academic rights have been brutally violated. We enjoin the Jordanian Government and King Hussein to rescind the dismissal order forthwith, and we urge scholars, intellectuals, writers and activists to demand the end of this lamentable state of affairs.  EDWARD W. SAID, NOAM CHOMSKY, FREDRIC JAMESON, IBRAHIM ABU-LUGHOD, EQBAL AHMAD  New York, Dec. 15, 1986  The writers are affiliated with, respectively, Columbia University, M.I.T., Duke University, Northwestern University and Hampshire College. Six others signed the letter.
