669|1987\01\04|WASHINGTON|The Administration is at the beginning of a difficult new year, but so far it does not seem to be at the beginning of any serious new policy review. In fact, you have to think hard to remember an Administration so earnestly pleased with itself in face of the facts. This year's budget deficit is estimated at $170 billion to $180 billion.|The Administration is at the beginning of a difficult new year, but so far it does not seem to be at the beginning of any serious new policy review. In fact, you have to think hard to remember an Administration so earnestly pleased with itself in face of the facts. This year's budget deficit is estimated at $170 billion to $180 billion. The Administration is at the beginning of a difficult new year, but so far it does not seem to be at the beginning of any serious new policy review. In fact, you have to think hard to remember an Administration so earnestly pleased with itself in face of the facts. This year's budget deficit is estimated at $170 billion to $180 billion. In November the trade deficit jumped to $19.5 billion and will come out for the year at about $173.6 billion, $25 billion over last year's record shortfall. Still, President Reagan proposes an overall budget of $1,024.3 billion for fiscal l988 and $1.8 trillion for the Pentagon over the next five years, while cutting farm aid by more than half and reducing many other domestic programs. In short, despite the President's mystifying optimism about home and foreign policy, the record is not very good, and not only because of unavoidable problems but also because of avoidable stupidities. A few changes have been made at the White House. Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North have gone to their well-deserved banishment, others including William Casey of the C.I.A. are thinking longingly of home, and Frank Carlucci is tidying up the muddle at the National Security Council. But otherwise, the top men are not really taking responsibility for the Iran-contra scandals but are trying to evade them by cleverness, which got them into the mess in the first place. This may change, however, when the 100th Congress convenes and the Democrats put forward their own view of the state of the Union. Nobody, of course, can know what that funny bunch will do, with their minds on the next election. They have won only two of the last five Presidential contests (both by Southerners) and many of them, intimidated by the President's popularity in the past, may be howling calamity and rejoicing too much over his recent troubles. But the new Speaker of the House, Jim Wright of Texas, and the new majority leader, Thomas Foley of Washington, are not likely to make that mistake. They and the moderate chairmen of the Senate committees like Lloyd Bentsen of Texas and Sam Nunn of Georgia will have plenty to say about the trade deficit and the President's nuclear policies; but nobody expects a runaway Congress, except perhaps in the committees established to investigate the sneaking of money to Iran and the contras. Much will depend on the President's mood after he returns from the hospital and signs off on his own State of the Union address. He can either go on defying the Congress or seek bipartisan support in his last two years, but he can't do both. It is in the field of arms control that his best hope lies, and he seemed to realize this in his New Year's message to the Soviet people. Referring to his meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in Iceland last October, he said: ''We did move things a good distance forward. On many issues, we made more progress in two days than our diplomats made in the last two years. Yes, a great deal of work remains, but both sides are closer now than ever before.'' Mr. Gorbachev was more critical but he was also careful. It may seem after last year that no more surprises are possible, but the biggest surprise of l987 may very well be that the mutual interest of these two nuclear nations in avoiding another round in a protracted arms race finally will produce a verifiable compromise. What is not in the cards is a dramatic breakthrough to a foolproof nuclear ''shield'' in outer space or a world free of all nuclear weapons by l996. The President's choice is likely to be agreement on substantial cuts in Soviet offensive weapons and some constraints on his space-based defense system, or no agreement on strategic arms during his last act on the White House stage. Here again the President has a chance to change his approach to this most important question of world politics by bringing leaders of the other party into serious consultation and negotiation as Roosevelt and Truman did with the Republicans at the end of the last world war and as Eisenhower did with the Democrats during his two terms. Only the President, however, can initiate such changes, and the Democrats could not refuse to cooperate if he did. But the terms of negotiation will have to be modified from utopian movie scripts to more realistic policies. Together the President and the new Congress could give common sense a shove in l987 (''It will be better,'' he promised), but only if Mr. Reagan really wants a new beginning with the Congress and the Russians.
