670|1987\01\04|Eligibility Standards Are Eased|THE loans offered by state-chartered mortgage agencies have lost some of their appeal since savings banks and other conventional lenders began aggressively promoting their own exceptionally low interest rates last fall.|THE loans offered by state-chartered mortgage agencies have lost some of their appeal since savings banks and other conventional lenders began aggressively promoting their own exceptionally low interest rates last fall. THE loans offered by state-chartered mortgage agencies have lost some of their appeal since savings banks and other conventional lenders began aggressively promoting their own exceptionally low interest rates last fall. These agencies have traditionally helped moderate-income buyers by offering mortgages at below-market rates, raising funds by issuing tax-exempt bonds. In some cases, however, rates are available in the private sector that are as low as those offered by the government agencies. Moreover, new restrictions on the use of tax-exempt bonds in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 spawned rumors that such loans would no longer be available and created the impression that it would be a waste of time to seek them this year. In fact, however, not only are these agencies finding new ways to remain in business, but they also are relaxing their guidelines so that more people and properties should be eligible this year. They will also be gradually lowering their rates, so the traditional benefits of below-market-cost financing should still make their offerings worth exploring. Their fixed-rate loans also provide safer vehicles for borrowers whose future income may be uncertain. For example, John Mendoza, a chef, and his wife, Ruth, who just bought their first home in East Hartford, Conn., for $95,000, chose an agency loan rather than a bank loan last fall even though the banks were offering slightly better terms for a variable-rate loan. ''When you live on a tight budget you worry about the variable rate,'' Mrs. Mendoza said. ''And we couldn't be sure our income would go up even if rates were going up.'' There is no question that these agencies will be in a strong financial position to make an abundant amount of loans. To insure a continued flow of funds, for example, the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority will be recycling substantial funds from the repayment of older loans, which are exempt from the Federal limits on new issues designed to curtail lending activity. The New Jersey Housing and Finance Mortgage Agency started negotiations with state banking officials last fall to make sure it would receive a sufficiently large portion of the state's total allowable amount of tax-exempt bonds to cover anticipated needs. ''We expect to have no trouble meeting our demand, at least until 1988,'' said James L. Logue 3d, the executive director. And Sonny Mae, the State of New York Mortgage Agency, will have 18 percent more money to lend this year than last because of a higher-than-normal bond issue at the end of last year coupled with the recycling of old funds. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Sonny Mae, flush with money and facing severe competition from the conventional lenders, is making some of the more dramatic changes. One of the most helpful for buyers is its changeover to a constant lending pattern rather than periodic offerings. ''You couldn't always find the house you wanted in time to use the program,'' said Christine A. Flynn, president of Sonny Mae. In addition, in place of the old system of ''income-ranking'' - a technique that gave buyers with the lowest incomes a better chance at the available money - the agency will now guarantee equal treatment to all qualified buyers. With so much more money available, income ranking was no longer necessary. SOMETIME this month, Sonny Mae is also planning to announce new rates that should provide fixed-rate mortgages at slightly below 8 percent - almost 2 points lower than the prevailing rate for fixed-rate loans by conventional lenders. It has also revamped its system of processing applications so that borrowers will be able to make telephone reservations through local banks for the amount being requested. And Ms. Flynn insists that a mortgage commitment from her agency should take no more than two weeks more than from a conventional lender. The only drawback is the introduction of income limits, but they tend to be generous and should not affect too many borrowers. In the past, the agency's house-price limits tended to skew the applications towards moderate-income buyers anyway as a way to insure that the program's In the downstate section of New York State, the limit will be $48,500 per year for each borrower, with a borrower defined as the actual buyer of the property (if the home is being bought in the name of one spouse then only his or her income is counted towards the total). Income limits fall slightly for upstate areas and rise marginally in specially targeted urban areas. For example, in parts of Mount Vernon and the outer boroughs of New York City, the limit rises to $53,000. Co-ops, condominiums and homes with up to four units are covered. On Long Island, the sales price limit is $113,670 for an existing house and $118,620 for a new house. In Westchester and New York City, it is $123,480 for an existing house and $116,460 for a new one. Allowable home prices rise slightly in the targeted areas. Only first-time buyers are eligible except in the targeted areas. For further details, call (800) 382-HOME. Connecticut will be offering 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages at 7.8 percent with a payment schedule that allows it to be paid off in 17 years. This is done by adding 65 cents for each $1,000 of the outstanding amount to the monthly payments after two years, and a further 65 cents two years later throughout the life of the loan. Income limits will be $38,000 for a household of three or fewer for Fairfield County buyers and slightly less for buyers in other areas of the state. Some funds will now also be set aside for prior owners. Home-price limits will be $130,000 in Fairfield County and $110,000 for most other areas, with the exception of specially targeted inner-city neighborhoods where they will be higher. For more details, call (203) 721-9501. The New Jersey agency's fixed mortgage rate, currently 8.55 percent, is the least competitive, but a new bond issue expected in late February or March should lower it significantly. Mr. Logue, the agency's executive director, said there should also be a relaxation of household income limits. To date, these have been $31,000 in the southern counties, with sales price limits of $130,000 in the north and $100,000 in the south. Again, buyers in some 40 targeted areas need not comply with income limits nor necessarily be first-time buyers. For further details call (800) 654-6873. TALKING: STATE LOANS
