672|1987\01\04|A Steady Sales Pace in Manhattan|THE overbuilt market of new condominiums in Manhattan could possibly falter in mid-1987, but some of last year's dire predictions of a market collapse will be forgotten if interest rates remain low and sales continue at their smooth, steady pace, according to many market analysts.|THE overbuilt market of new condominiums in Manhattan could possibly falter in mid-1987, but some of last year's dire predictions of a market collapse will be forgotten if interest rates remain low and sales continue at their smooth, steady pace, according to many market analysts. THE overbuilt market of new condominiums in Manhattan could possibly falter in mid-1987, but some of last year's dire predictions of a market collapse will be forgotten if interest rates remain low and sales continue at their smooth, steady pace, according to many market analysts. Some of the doom forecasters are already eating their hats. ''I had expected the new construction market to be a total disaster now,'' said Neil J. Binder, a partner in Bellmarc Realty, an apartment brokerage that also manages new buildings. ''I'm not going to say that it's a steamroller, but the new construction market is not having any real problems - and, to me, that's very surprising.'' Other analysts are still cautious. ''I believe the market cannot deal with the units that are out there, but I can't represent that the owners are having problems - they are keeping a stiff upper lip at this point,'' said Yale Robbins, who publishes statistical information about Manhattan condominium development and sales. He estimated that there are 25,000 condominium apartments, including several thousand renovation projects, now in construction or about to begin. If the market can absorb them, developers have proposed building an additional 25,000 apartments, including a large number of rentals. In any event, the sharp decline in interest rates is largely credited with keeping both new and resale apartment markets on an even keel - at a time when Federal tax laws were changing, investors were deserting the marketplace and developers were marketing thousands of new units to take advantage of 10-year tax abatements under the Section 421a program, which expired for market-rate construction in most of Manhattan in late 1985. The decline in rates, to the lowest level in eight years, made the apartments more affordable to buyers and, equally important, allowed developers to extend their sales period without incurring the sort of crippling credit expenses that force distress sales, concessions and bankruptcies. In a parallel fashion, the resale market for existing cooperatives and condominiums in Manhattan has also picked up steam, brokers happily report. Prices for postwar apartments continued to be flat or slightly rising, but large prewar apartments in desirable locations have risen by as much as 10 to 15 percent, brokers said. Demand for larger apartments of any era is still stronger than demand for studios and one-bedroom apartments, but a few brokers, including Mr. Binder, asserted that small units have recovered from the sharp decline in value they experienced last summer. The whole apartment market, then, was beginning to tighten, with sales activity increasing and prices beginning to advance tentatively in the last months of 1986. What's in store for the new year? ''An educated guess, based on what 1986 brought, would be that larger prewar co-ops will appreciate tremendously - maybe 10 to 15 percent - in 1987 because of the shortage of listings for anything larger than five and a half rooms,'' said Barbara Corcoran, president of the Corcoran Group, a Manhattan brokerage for resale co-ops and new condominiums. Smaller co-ops - studios to four-and-a-half-room apartments - will appreciate by about 8 percent, Mrs. Corcoran estimated. In the market for new condominiums, she predicts, some prices will fall - not because of the poor market, but because developers overpriced their units from the start. ''It's a level market, not one that's going up,'' she said. ''Some developers overpaid on land and they needed to price units at a high level to make a profit - and some of them are nervous now.'' The Corcoran Group is marketing about 1,100 condominiums in 12 new buildings, including eight projects that will be announced this year. The emphasis, she said, will be on larger apartments. NEW condominium prices do not seem to be increasing marketwide - the average price per square foot has been hovering around $350 for a couple years -but marketing executives assert that prices have risen in many locations. For example, apartments at the Waterford, a 200-unit condominium at 93d and Second Avenue, sell for an average of $325 a square foot. ''The price of this building is 15 percent higher than it would have been if we opened it a year ago,'' said James C. Stewart, president of Gilbert Charles Beylen, a Manhattan marketing concern. ''Prices are continually going up, not that developers are making more profit - land, construction and materials are constantly going up.'' Mr. Stewart, reflecting the view of nearly all developers and marketing agents interviewed, said sales are strong and steady. ''We are running somewhere around 12 percent behind our projections, which we made 18 months ago,'' he said. At this pace, he estimated that the company's 13 projects will sell out in an average of 12 months rather than 10 months, as originally projected. No concessions are offered or planned, he said. Some of the firm's projects are selling at a brisk pace. Marketing began at The Dunhill - the developer Arun Bhatia's 29-story condominium rising at 401 East 84th Street, at First Avenue - last October and half the 88 units have been sold. The America - the developer Ian Bruce Eichner's 36-story co-op going up at 300 East 85th Street, at Second Avenue - also began sales the same month and 30 percent of the 201 units have been sold. Apartments in both buildings average $350 a square foot. ''Purchasers have been flooding in,'' said Robert W. Burnett, a vice president with M. J. Raynes. He was referring to the Corinthian, the 57-story condominium that has 863 units, the most of any residential building under construction. Raynes, which is marketing the property for Bernard Spitzer, the developer, said that 160 units, or more than $40 million worth of property, had been sold during the first five weeks of sales for occupancy scheduled next fall, and that the company was still screening 1,200 buyers who had signed up on a waiting list to see the apartment plans. The building occupies the site of the former East Side Airlines Terminal, between 37th and 38th Streets off First Avenue. Its signature is a bay window with 180-degree views in every apartment. Prices average $350 a square foot. Some buildings have run into the kind of trouble that was expected to be more widespread at this point. Financing problems halted construction at 32-34 West 66th Street last summer and the problems with the 49-unit condominium have not been resolved. ''We are now in the process of restructuring it,'' said Herbert Handman, the developer. ''We might be in a postion to continue shortly or it may take longer.'' He would not provide any details. Deposits were returned to some buyers, but others are hoping the project will be completed, he added. The building is about 85 percent complete, according to the builder. EVEN when the apartments themselves are small or mundane, developers are enhancing their buildings with bold exteriors by brand-name architects and knock-'em-dead lobbies. Italy, in fact, must be running low on marble, judging by its lavish use in this new crop of condominiums. Donald Trump's model for his lobby at Trump Parc at 106 Central Park South, for example, makes it look like a mausoleum - with floors, planters, walls and cornices of gold-streaked marble. Trump Parc apartments vary in price from less than $200,000 for the 65 studios to $7 million for a penthouse apartment. About 35 percent of the units have been bought since late October, said Blanche Sprague, executive vice president of the Trump Organization. In the resale co-op market, the strong year-end activity was partly stimulated by the change in Federal tax laws. Sellers who were reaping capital gains - and not using all the profit to buy another prime residence -wanted their capital gains taxed under the more generous rule in effect until last Dec. 31. ''The last month has been fantastic,'' said Betsy Dean, director of co-op sales at Douglas Elliman-Haldenstein on the West Side. ''I thought it must be the tax plan, but most of our deals are not closing in 1986 because there is too much of a backlog in building management offices. ''You can't even get the managers on the telephone, they were going crazy trying to accommodate the buyers who wanted to close before the end of the year.'' What has been making this market tick has been the decline in interest rates, according to most real-estate professionals. The bullish stock market and the enormous Christmas bonuses handed out on Wall Street also helped, they say. For the buyer, the decline in mortgage interest rates - now less than 9 percent for conventional loans - seems to provide the bargain that was needed to dislodge psychological and financial resistance to today's prices. The monthly carrying cost of a $250,000 conventional mortgage, for example, is now around $2,000, compared with $2,500 at average 1985 prices (in March 1985, such a loan would have cost $2,800 a month). For developers, the decline in rates is doubly sweet. Not only does the reduced cost of credit prompt more apartment sales, but it also allows developers to extend sales periods without sacrificing profit or risking bankruptcy. The extra sales time is available because lenders financed construction of this wave of condominium projects in 1985 - before rates started to decline by 25 percent, according to Richard R. Pergolis, a partner with Pergolis-Swartz, a Manhattan mortgage brokerage. In a typical condominium project, a lender will write a construction loan to cover 80 to 100 percent of the total development cost and to finance an ''interest reserve account.'' This reserve, or debt-service account, supplies the lender with interest payments during the 24-month duration of the loan. For additional steep fees, the lender will usually extend the loan for up to one more year. The interest rate on these variable-rate loans generally floats 1.5 to 2 percentage points over the prime rate - but the debt-service account is financed on the expectation that rates will be stable for two years. If the prime rate increases, then the reserve account will be used up more quickly, and either the lender will increase the loan or require the developer to pay the extra interest costs. But if the prime rate falls, as it did, the reserve account is drawn down more slowly and the developer has more time to sell apartments. ''Instead of having to build and sell their units within 24 months, developers now have around 30 months to sell without having to put up any more of their own money into the project,'' said Andrew J. Singer, who said his brokerage firm, Ackman Brothers & Singer, arranged financing for about 1,000 of the apartments in the marketplace. If rates had remained at their higher level, many developers would probably have been getting nervous - and offering discounts and concessions - now because their loans would be coming due in the summer. The decline in rates, however, has granted developers a reprieve, possibly until next fall or winter if rates remain stable. William C. McCahill, a vice president in charge of Chase Manhattan Bank's construction lending in the area, confirmed this market view. ''Most of our buildings are in pretty good shape, given the sales in the presale period before completion and the savings in the interest reserve accounts,'' he said. ''I am not saying everyone will be in good shape, but most will.'' Chase financed about 2,000 of the units on the market and about half have already been sold, Mr. McCahill estimated. But he said two of the bank's 15 condominium projects were already offering below-market financing to buyers. He would not identify the buildings -since concessions are usually associated with failing projects or undesirable apartments, lenders and developers do not like to publicize them. Another 2,000 units financed by Chase will come on the market this year, Mr. McCahill said. ''I don't see prices going up in the next nine to 12 months,'' he concluded, ''but as supply in the market begins to dwindle, it will put pressure on prices again. And with the relative dearth of new jobs scheduled for 1988 and 1989, that trend should continue.'' Ric Katz, president of RAMS Marketing, a Manhatan firm that creates marketing strategies for new buildings, forecast that concessions would start appearing as early as next summer at buildings that were not properly marketed, designed, financed or situated. ''Some buildings will only be 50 percent or 40 percent sold out and developers will start trying to stimulate sales through incentives or giveaways,'' he said. ''But this won't happen at the prime locations or where apartments are being marketed correctly. ''My instincts tell me that there are developers out there right now giving some concessions - paying the closing costs or giving decorating allowances - but I can't cite examples.'' Buildings that RAMS is marketing include 100 United Nations Plaza, where Mr. Katz said 87 percent of the 271 units had been sold. Only one major building, Astor Terrace at 245 East 93d Street, has placed full-page advertisements for its generous concession: conventional financing at the below-market rate of 8 percent. The apartments are well-designed, but some brokers say the prices are high for its location. One-bedroom apartments start at $200,000. Jean Soloman, one of the building's developers, said the financing was a temporary inducement to keep ''our excellent momentum going through the holiday season.'' Mrs. Soloman said the building was close to 85 percent sold. She would provide no information on the terms of construction financing. THERE is no way to independently verify sales, a term that includes binding sales contracts as well as recorded closings. Yale Robbins, whose research firm publishes data on Manhattan sales, reported that as of Nov. 15, 48 percent of the units at Astor Terrace had closed and an additional 15 percent were under contract, a combined total of 63 percent sold. The estimates are based on interviews with developers, marketing agents and other sources familar with projects, as well as data on recorded sales. According to Mr. Robbins, it is not uncommon for sellers to overstate their sales. There have been no recorded sales at Metropolitan Tower, the 78-story condominium with 239 units going up at 146 West 57th Street, but here again, the developer's figures and Yale Robbins' are far apart. Julie Simpson, a spokeman for Harry Macklowe Real Estate Company, the developer, said about 50 percent of the units were sold. Mr. Robbins, however, asserted that only 25 percent of the units were sold as of last July 15 and that this percentage had not increased as of Nov. 15. ''They may represent that they sold 50 percent,'' Mr. Robbins said, ''but we believe that the number was 25 percent, based on our conversations with people directly and indirectly involved with the project.'' Prices at Metropolitan Tower, which is nearing completion, have been increased four times and now average $550 a square foot - a price that reflects the building's high level of service and park views. Some brokers, though, consider the property overpriced for the 57th Street location.
