673|1987\01\04|Broadcasting Looks To the Bottom-Line|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. CAN the businessmen running the nation's three big television networks create programming that viewers, and thus, advertisers, will like? The answer will begin to unfold in 1987, as three neophyte media managers make decisions that affect what Americans will be watching -or not watching - on TV. At NBC, the air is thick with uncertainty and tension. Robert Wright, the former head of General Electric Credit, installed as NBC's new chief after G.E. took over the network last year, does not seem to be going over well with his new employees. A poem making the rounds at 30 Rockefeller Center, network headquarters, even shows a craving for poor ratings to shake up what is viewed as hostile new management:  So this Xmas season, as you  search for yule cheer,  Pray for an upset in ratings next  year,  Though the old days were clouded  by viewer neglect,  30 Rock was a family, and we had  self respect. There is also turmoil at the top of CBS, currently controlled by Laurence A. Tisch, the chairman of the Loews Corporation, and at ABC, headed by Thomas Murphy of Capital Cities Communications. If these men can narrow the cultural gap between their executive offices and the networks' creative people, their money-making skills will be welcome. Both CBS and ABC have been under increasing financial strain. Their advertising revenues are under double pressure: They both trail NBC in the Nielsen ratings, and they trail in an era when advertiser spending on television has slowed. Costs must be cut - and much of the cutting may be on the once-sacrosanct news side, which under traditional management had been treated as a public trust. Another big question for 1987 is whether that trust might be one of the first victims of the new regimes. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
