674|1987\01\04|Steel's Strength Depends on a Shutdown|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. IN the beleaguered steel business, all eyes will be on the USX Corporation. The nation's largest steel company is undergoing the longest work stoppage in industry history. So far, the protracted shutdown, which began last August, has idled 22,000 workers and halted production. As it removes one-fifth of the industry's steelmaking capacity, the stoppage has also given fresh hope to USX's major competitors - namely, the embattled Bethlehem Steel and the bankrupt LTV. As they absorb the orders traditionally placed with USX, they are reporting modest improvements in shipment levels and pricing. Now these and other rivals are worried about the return of the giant steelmaker's capacity. An end to the work stoppage, they say, will bludgeon an already depressed industry. And most steel company executives say the end is in sight: They do not expect the five-month-old shutdown to last much beyond the first quarter. USX has already lost orders placed for delivery in the first quarter, they say, and the company will want to salvage orders for delivery in the second quarter. And, they point out, most workers' unemployment benefits are beginning to run out. Once the shutdown ends, many analysts say, USX will mount a vigorous effort to seize back market share and customer loyalty. The company, they predict, will slash prices dramatically and undercut other producers. Analysts also say, however, that when USX resumes production, it will be at a level far below its pre-shutdown rate. USX chairman David M. Roderick has said that it is unclear whether the company will reopen all of its plants when the work stoppage ends. The market situation for each product line, he says, will dictate what facilities will reopen. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
