676|1987\01\04|POSTINGS: 11 on S.I.; Grymes Hill Splendor|Generally speaking, real estate on Staten Island does not trigger images of resplendent homes with seven-digit prices. That, however, is what is being offered in the Enclave, a new development in one of the borough's oldest and most exclusive neighborhoods.|Generally speaking, real estate on Staten Island does not trigger images of resplendent homes with seven-digit prices. That, however, is what is being offered in the Enclave, a new development in one of the borough's oldest and most exclusive neighborhoods. Generally speaking, real estate on Staten Island does not trigger images of resplendent homes with seven-digit prices. That, however, is what is being offered in the Enclave, a new development in one of the borough's oldest and most exclusive neighborhoods. When finished in the summer of 1988, its 11 custom-built houses will stud Howard Circle, a private road entered through a gate off Howard Avenue in the Grymes Hill section. In pre-negotiated agreements based on plans, three buyers have committed between $1.1 million and $1.4 million for homes. Each detached house must be a minimum of 4,500 square feet. There are views of the Manhattan skyline and the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge from the back of the development. ''If you want a large, luxury home with an amazing view of Manhattan, this is it,'' said John Noce, a principal in Princewood Development Group, a builder and developer on Staten Island, which is doing the project. Buyers work with the architect, Calvanico Associates of Staten Island, to determine the exact style of each two-story house. Only stucco, stone or brick siding will be permitted, and the backs of the homes will be made primarily of glass to afford the best views of New York Harbor. Mr. Noce, who is in partnership with his brother, Joseph, and Emanuel Bolitiere, said a typical house would measure 5,500 square feet and would include four to five bedrooms, four bathrooms, a study, a library, a recreation room and a three-car garage. The only thing not terribly gargantuan about the development is the size of the parcels, which range from one-quarter to three-quarters of an acre. The entire site originally covered eight acres, but the developer donated three and a half acres to an environmental group.
