677|1987\01\04|POSTINGS: F.D.U. Offers a Site; Corporate Retreat|In a move to generate extra income, Fairleigh Dickinson University is seeking a new kind of student. ''Many corporations today want to establish educational programs by going on a retreat, isolating themselves off somewhere in order to train and update their personnel,'' said James V. Griffo, assistant to the president for resource development at the large, private institution in New|In a move to generate extra income, Fairleigh Dickinson University is seeking a new kind of student. ''Many corporations today want to establish educational programs by going on a retreat, isolating themselves off somewhere in order to train and update their personnel,'' said James V. Griffo, assistant to the president for resource development at the large, private institution in New In a move to generate extra income, Fairleigh Dickinson University is seeking a new kind of student. ''Many corporations today want to establish educational programs by going on a retreat, isolating themselves off somewhere in order to train and update their personnel,'' said James V. Griffo, assistant to the president for resource development at the large, private institution in New Jersey. That is precisely what a new conference and training center, now under construction on a 13-acre parcel of the Florham-Madison campus, will offer the many companies that have set up shop in Morris County in recent years. Under a $1.9 million, 50-year lease, the university has put the Hamilton Park Executive Conference Center, as it is called, in the hands of three developers: Dolce Company of Houston; Lewis C. Bowers and Sons Inc. of Princeton, N.J.; and Whitesell Enterprises Ltd. of Delran, N.J. Designed by Bowers Design Associates, the $34 million complex, on Park Avenue in Florham Park, will occupy 200,000 square feet and will have 215 guest rooms, 34 meeting rooms and an extensive fitness center. Daily rates are set at $235 for a single and $175 for a double, in which the guest would share the room with a colleague. The rates include three meals a day and full use of the facilities. Completion is scheduled for spring 1988. In addition to the prepaid lease, the university will realize additional income every year from the center's operation, starting in three years. And the developers have agreed to form a scholarship program for students studying hotel management. ''In terms of corporate growth, Morris County is going off the board,'' said Joseph Crimmins, vice president of sales and marketing in the Dolce Company's Morristown, N.J., office. This is not the first time the university has ventured into the corporate world, however. Several years ago, it developed a 490,000-square-foot office park at its Teaneck-Hackensack campus.
