678|1987\01\04|Paying Up-Front For Aerospace Projects|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. THE new year ushers in a new high-risk era for the nation's aerospace industry. The tough procurement procedures adopted in 1986 by the Pentagon are forcing the major aerospace companies to spend billions on upfront development costs - money that once was supplied largely by Government. Companies are incurring the costs just to compete for big contracts, with no assurance of a payoff in the long run. Because potential profits are vast, no major company has decided against taking the risk. The battle to build the Advanced Tactical Fighter, the next generation of Air Force fighter planes, is a case in point. Upfront costs are expected to be in the billions, but the contract itself could amount to $50 billion. The winner will be chosen in 1990. To spread the risk, aerospace and military-related companies have broken into teams. The finalists are a group including Northrop and McDonnell Douglas on one hand and Lockheed, Boeing and General Dynamics on the other. Similar competitions are being waged over the Navy's new Advanced Tactical Aircraft strike plane and the Army's LHX helicopter. The new pay-upfront system is being hailed by the armed services as a more efficient way of spending the taxpayers' money. But critics say the plan could encourage contractors to take money-saving shortcuts in the development stage that could lead ultimately to less effective aircraft. And they argue that the system encourages conservative designs and could stifle innovative but expensive research. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
