679|1987\01\04|Recycling City-Owned Buildings|LATE last month, the Koch administration gave a formal send-off to an ambitious long-term housing effort when the Mayor announced a plan to renovate 5,200 apartments in vacant city-owned buildings.|LATE last month, the Koch administration gave a formal send-off to an ambitious long-term housing effort when the Mayor announced a plan to renovate 5,200 apartments in vacant city-owned buildings. LATE last month, the Koch administration gave a formal send-off to an ambitious long-term housing effort when the Mayor announced a plan to renovate 5,200 apartments in vacant city-owned buildings. Even before the plan was made public, advocates of low-income housing were expressing the view that it would provide too few apartments for the poor, defined as households with gross annual incomes of less than $15,000. But there is a more critical issue, at least in the minds of those who recall the abandonment of gut rehabilitations done for lower-income renters in Harlem and the Bronx in the 1970's under another mortgage-interest subsidy program, the Federal Section 236 program. And that is, Will the buildings survive in the long run as decent rental housing, or will future inflation or a market downturn lead to a new wave of abandonment? In part, the answer turns on circumstances that cannot be foretold - the rate of inflation, the adequacy of stabilized rent increases, the state of the city's economy and of the rental market generally. But it also turns on how the programs are set up initially. And there is no doubt that the leadership of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development - notably Commissioner Paul A. Crotty and his deputy commissioner for development, Mark Willis - are aware of the potential pitfalls as well as the opportunities, and have tried to take them into consideration in planning the program. The city owns about 5,500 vacant tax-foreclosed buildings and they are believed to contain 55,000 to 60,000 apartments. The plan announced last month applies to about 10 percent of the apartments in that stock - 5,200 units - and 5 percent of the buildings. Most of these apartments - 3,400 in 211 buildings, grouped into 53 development sites - are to be awarded through a request-for-proposals bidding process. The city intends to develop the remaining 1,800 apartments in 59 buildings itself through the use of construction management companies. The requests for proposals will go out tomorrow and will be due back in phases - roughly a third in February, a third in June and a third in August. In the review, housing officials are trying to accomplish many steps simultaneously rather than sequentially as in the past. They expect construction in the first phase to begin by next January, a schedule that officials feel is as rapid as can be achieved. Preparations are also under way to put out an additional 1,000 units for construction by nonprofit developers only, with financing possibly obtained through such entities as the Local Initiative Support Corporation, known as LISC, a national operation established by foundations and major corporations to assist neighborhood economic development and housing for lower-income people. One problem is how to get the job done with efficiency at reasonable cost, a difficult proposition for nonprofit companies if they have little previous experience or none of their own capital at stake. As administered by the Department of Housing Preservation and Development over the last several years, the request-for-proposal process has not acquired a reputation for producing results. In many cases, local wrangling over who should be chosen to do what work has led to delaying awards for months, or making none at all for no publicly disclosed reason, leaving bidders disillusioned with the process and the agency. THAT experience led the Citizen Housing and Planning Council, a housing advisory organization, to propose a different method of project award for the vacant tax-foreclosed buildings, based on the notion that it is a futile exercise to focus selection on a ''competitive variable'' since the costs of gut rehabilitation are well known and essentially the same for all. It called the request-for-proposal procedure ''the politically most acceptable approach,'' but one that wastes time and money once the city has decided how its property should be used. The chairman of the Citizen Housing and Planning Council panel that issued the report was Sander Lehrer, a former city Housing Commissioner. The council proposed that the city issue a detailed ''scope of work'' detailing to builders what it wants for the housing and how soon it wants it, and then make its selections from a pool of prequalified builders on a site-specific or random basis. ''Only if the R.F.P. process becomes predictable, timely and realistic,'' the committee said, ''will rehabilitation of large numbers of city-owned propoerties become possible.'' But the Department of Housing Preservation and Development decided it could not proceed without a competitive bidding process. The agency will offer the buildings at $1 each, and essentially tell bidders how much subsidy is available for each development ''package'' - with up to 250 apartments per package. They will be given proposed layouts and told the minimum number of low-income units that must be provided. Selection preference will go to the developer that can provide the greater number of low-income units - that is, build for a cheaper cost, or possibly build in lower operating costs. The bidder will have 90 days to win private construction financing, Commissioner Willis said, and if it fails, the selection will go to the next most favorable bid. Since bank financing is needed, bids will have to be ''realistic.'' Bank financing, in fact, is critical to the entire endeavor. City officials have been careful to carry on a dialogue with Michael D. Lappin, president of the New York City Community Preservation Corporation, a consortium of commercial and savings banks that has provided construction and permanent financing to more rental rehabilitation projects in the city that any other lender. Its borrowers - typically owners of medium-sized rental property -are expected to be prominent among the bidders for the gut rehabilitations of city-owned buildings. The corporation also has been the city's lending partner in many ''participation'' loans, in which the city provides roughly half the financing at 1 percent interest. In the Section 236 program, the entire insured mortgage was financed at 1 percent, and it was intended to cover 95 percent of the development cost. Many builders are believed to have been able to cover 100 percent of their costs or more. IF rents could not support costs over time, the builder - having made substantial profits in the early development stages - would soon default and H.U.D. would find itself in possession of the property. In the city's program, the 1 percent financing will apply to about two-thirds of the development cost. In a typical situation, the development cost in a gut rehabilitation of a 50-unit building might be $60,000 an apartment. The builder would put in $6,000, the city would finance $40,000 of the cost at 1 percent, and the private lender would finance the rest, $14,000 a unit, or 23 percent of the total. Maximum initial rents for moderate-income households would not exceed $450 a month for a studio, $600 for a one-bedroom, $700 for a two-bedroom and $800 for a three-bedroom. The average moderate-income rent will be $575 a month. Initial rents for low-income families would be capped for two-bedroom apartments at $350. The private lender will be at risk in the construction and permanent financing, and can be expected to insist that rents be higher than the market within the area would support. In this way, builders and their lenders can be more confident that in the event of vacancy, they can rerent at a level that the project requires. ''The market rent and the allowable rent must be consistent,'' Mr. Lappin said. In the Section 236 program, tenants came in paying 30 percent of their income as rent, said Alexander Naclerio, former director of housing in the regional office of the Federal Housing Administration, and it was assumed that their incomes would rise as rent requirements increased. That did not happen during the inflationary 1970's; the government refused to allow rents to rise to levels many tenants would have found unaffordable, and builders defaulted. Much property fell back into Federal hands. IN the city program, normal rent-stabilized increases are expected to compensate for rising operating costs. In addition, private lenders are likely to require that owners be able to rent to tenants with incomes above the program's limits if, after a certain reasonable time period, they cannot find enough tenants incomes below them. ''There must be enough flexibility built into the income limits and the rent limits to permit the project to pay for increases in costs over time,'' said Mr. Lehrer, the former housing commissioner. According to Mr. Lappin, the actual costs of gut rehabilitations are known from experience. Opportunities for quick profit are not ''built into the program,'' he said, and builders will want to operate their properties over time. The vacant buildings in the first three phases are primarily being given at zero cost and will pay zero property taxes. The annual mortgage-interest subsidy comes to about $4,000 a year per family on a 1 percent loan of $43,000. The requests for proposals will be of two types, Commissioner Willis said. Some will ask for 20 percent low-income units, based on the principle that the buildings will be capable of generating enough income from the rest of the apartments to subsidize the rents of the low-income units. Other buildings are in locations where they cannot be expected to generate enough rental income for subsidizing lower-income tenants. The market areas are not considered strong enough to permit ''cross-subsidies,'' in which market-rate gut rehabilitations can achieve such high figures in rents or sales that builders can afford to subsidize lower-income buildings in the vicinity. This principle has been applied to the disposal of city-owned buildings in Williamsburg, in Brooklyn, and on the Lower East Side. PERSPECTIVES: GUT REHABILITATIONS
