68|1987\01\01|PLASTER CASTS OF STATUES: FROM STORAGE INTO VOGUE|The vast warehouse storage room is wall-to-wall with plaster replicas of the great sculpture of the Western world - by Michelangelo, Praxiteles and hundreds of others. But the statues stand in crowded rows, their faces chipped and cracked and black with the accumulated grime of decades. Disembodied heads are found by the boxful, and many figures have no lower limbs.|The vast warehouse storage room is wall-to-wall with plaster replicas of the great sculpture of the Western world - by Michelangelo, Praxiteles and hundreds of others. But the statues stand in crowded rows, their faces chipped and cracked and black with the accumulated grime of decades. Disembodied heads are found by the boxful, and many figures have no lower limbs. The vast warehouse storage room is wall-to-wall with plaster replicas of the great sculpture of the Western world - by Michelangelo, Praxiteles and hundreds of others. But the statues stand in crowded rows, their faces chipped and cracked and black with the accumulated grime of decades. Disembodied heads are found by the boxful, and many figures have no lower limbs. It is the Metropolitan Museum of Art's collection of plaster casts -once among the museum's most highly prized treasures but until just a few years ago ignored and crumbling in a leaky storehouse under the West Side Highway in upper Manhattan. Recently, however, the casts have benefited from a renaissance of interest among scholars, who increasingly find them worthy of study, restoration and exhibition. Riding this wave of renewed interest, the Met was able last year to transfer the collection to a storage warehouse in the Bronx, and has lent hundreds of the works to museums and universities nationwide. ''We tried for years, with limited resources and different priorities, to have them restored and placed in academies and schools, but there were no takers,'' said Philippe de Montebello, the director of the Metropolitan Museum. ''There is no question there was a period of time when there was less interest than at other times. But with this resurgence of interest, we were able to gather up the resources to cope with them. I'd love to see more of them restored and put on loan.'' A center for the renewed interest in the casts is the Queens Museum, in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. In the mid 1970's, the museum began to restore some of the Met's damaged casts, and today it runs a conservation laboratory exclusively for that purpose. In return for conserving the works, the Queens Museum is granted the right to borrow them on long-term loan. Permanent Exhibition Last April, the Queens Museum opened a permanent exhibition of 22 of the restored plaster casts, including those of the Venus de Milo, the Belvedere Torso and eight sculptures by Michelangelo, including the Florentine Pieta, the Dawn and Dusk figures from the Medici Chapel and the Dying Slave. ''We're looking at a real revolution in taste,'' said Janet Schneider, the director of the Queens Museum. ''After World War II, modern artists were seeking to negate the dominant Western classical tradition, and casts were a symbol of that tradition. Many of them were destroyed. But now, in 1986, there's a whole new generation of artists who never saw a cast. They've been away so long they begin to look new.'' Among the other institutions that have borrowed plaster casts from the Metropolitan Museum are Princeton University, Carnegie Mellon University and the New York Academy of Art, a school in Manhattan that uses a curriculum based on Renaissance and Beaux-Arts principles. The new interest in plaster casts, most experts agree, is yet another expression of ''post-modern'' taste, which extends beyond pure abstract art to an interest in a variety of historical styles, ranging from figurative and expressionist art to the architectural use of classical figures and decorations. Originally, plaster casts were the most prized holdings of major American museums, which in the 19th century collected them in the belief that masterpieces of European classical art and architecture would never be available - or affordable. Casting Teams In the late 19th century, the great museums of Europe, such as the Louvre and the British Museum, made casts of the original works in their collections to sell to American museums and collectors; at other times, American museums commissioned teams of craftsmen to make casts from the originals. In the early 20th century, however, as American fortunes grew and many in Europe dwindled, masterpieces began to flow to the west. A taste for originals came to dominate, and casts were put in storage or destroyed en masse until, by the 1940's, virtually none were on view. The fragility of the plaster casts made their storage perilous, and the Met's collection was no exception. In the 158th Street storehouse, the sculptures were often piled atop one another. Wind, leaky roofs and vibrations from traffic all took their toll. The turnabout began around 1975, when the Queens Museum requested, and received, the loan of several casts from the Met. In return, the smaller museum agreed to restore the works, and a conservation studio was formed for that purpose. The restoration project stalled in the late 70's for lack of funds but was revived in 1983 with a $150,000 grant from the Chase Manhattan Bank. In June 1985, with the encouragement of Mayor Koch, $100,000 in city funds were allocated to the restoration program, and later that year, as part of a highway construction project, the city paid for the transportation of the casts from the West Side Highway site to the Bronx. Multiprocess Cleaning Today, the Queens Museum conservation laboratory is working on more than 350 borrowed casts. A team of four can take up to a month on a major piece, at an average cost of between $10,000 and $20,000. The process involves soaking the surface with a mild solvent, gently scraping off the dirt, then painting and polishing the statue. According to Ms. Schneider, the casts are not without their detractors - ''many people still consider them duller than death'' - but their assets outweigh their limitations. She said that since many of the casts, such as those of the Parthenon frieze, were made before pollution decayed the original works, they actually showed far more detail than the current originals. The casts have proved popular with many artists. George Segal, the contemporary sculptor who works in roughly modeled plaster, recently visited the plaster-cast replicas of Michelangelo's Medici Chapel sculptures at the New York Academy of Art. ''Nobody stops you when you run your hand over the musculature,'' said Mr. Segal. ''One of the primary experiences of being a sculptor is physical tangibility, being able to see and touch. I thought it was magnificent to encounter a Michelangelo cast that way. These experiences are remarkably rich.''
