680|1987\01\04|Offering Property At Fire-Sale Prices|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. WITH most cities still burdened by a glut of unoccupied space, excitement in real estate this year is likely to come more from the sale of property than from new construction. There will be plenty of sellers, most of them in distress in one way or another. Banks in Florida, Texas, Colorado and New York have suffered huge losses on construction lending and permanent financing. To stem the drain on earnings caused by empty buildings, they will be eager to unload shopping centers, condominiums and office buildings at steep discounts from the values placed on the properties at the time they first made the loans. Joining them in aggressive selling will be the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, both of them stuck with bulging portfolios of unprofitable real estate. Developers, farmers and investors who held on through a sluggish market for the past year or so, hoping for improvement, will finally quit when the economy fails to pick up speed. Among the best deals will be hotels, unoccupied condominiums and office buildings, and historic properties renovated under advantageous tax rules that no longer apply. But anyone who wades in will have to exhibit a great deal of staying power. Gone are the days when inflation and growth in the office work force would automatically bring good times after bad, and anyone carrying heavy debt loads will be a candidate for liquidation before the next peak. The buyers who will gobble up the bargains, paying half what developers were asking in early 1986, will be those who who are not already weighed down with heavy debt -America's real estate tycoons. The tycoons (and the life insurance companies and pension funds that follow them) will be looking for cash returns, not for the kind of tax breaks that made so many real estate deals appeal to small investors in the last decade. Those breaks have been eliminated by the tax law that took effect on Jan. 1. In some specific markets - primarily New York, California and Washington, D.C. - foreign investors, particularly Japanese and Hong Kong-based Chinese, will supply staggering amounts of capital, driving up prices in fits and starts as they struggle to learn the local business. But these buyers will test the market outside the major cities only tentatively, having little impact on prices nationwide. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
