682|1987\01\04|Investment Banks Bet With Their Own Money|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. FOR Wall Street, 1987 could prove a particularly tough year as investment bankers grapple with the consequences of takeover mania and of their headlong rush into the international arena. Just about every major investment bank has grown top-heavy with merger specialists in recent years as they have fought to pull in more of this lucrative business. It has also meant, though, that they must generate a continuing flow of transactions to support the overhead. Increasingly, they are doing this by agreeing to finance transactions with their own capital - to become merchant bankers. In one deal this fall, First Boston lent the Campeau Corporation $865 million for its $3.5 billion takeover of Allied Stores. Yet First Boston's total capital amounted to only about $1.3 billion at the end of September. Thus, investment firms will be tying up a significant portion of capital - capital they used to regard as a safety cushion - in huge and potentially risky loans. Should one of those loans sour, a major firm could be sunk, or crippled. Should the whole takeover business slow, the huge profits earned in the past five years could be sucked into an abyss. Wall Street firms will also be trying to figure out just how much of an international presence they need. Most firms have spent fortunes to build large operations in London, Tokyo and elsewhere to take advantage of the increasingly international flow of capital. But the trend has been driven by competition, not profits. So much has been spent on building that few if any major firms have brought home any dividends. Instead, their aim has been to buy market share, foregoing profits today in the hope of gains in the future when lesser competitors are driven out. The problem is that major foreign financial institutions and American commercial banks have far more capital, and thus staying power, than some major investment banks. Wall Street firms have held their own so far, but if the long-awaited international shakeout does come to pass in 1987, some top firms will have to stand prepared to lay off hundreds of people overseas, write off some of their investment, and give up their international pretensions. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
