683|1987\01\04|Helping the Elderly Keep Their Homes|IN an effort to help elderly homeowners trying to hold on to their houses, the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority will begin offering low-interest loans to finance the construction of accessory apartments later this month.|IN an effort to help elderly homeowners trying to hold on to their houses, the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority will begin offering low-interest loans to finance the construction of accessory apartments later this month. IN an effort to help elderly homeowners trying to hold on to their houses, the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority will begin offering low-interest loans to finance the construction of accessory apartments later this month. Carol A. Montesi, a spokesman for the authority, said funds for the program would come out of the agency's surplus assets, which consist of monies paid back on other authority loans. ''We're confident we can meet the demand,'' Ms. Montesi said. ''We will provide the necessary resources.'' The program, to be called Apartment Conversions for the Elderly, will be open to homeowners 62 or older and will provide as much as $80,000 in 30-year fixed-rate financing with interest rates as low as 7 percent, Ms. Montesi said. The accessory apartment must be within a single-family owner-occupied house, with its own bath, kitchen, living and sleeping areas, she said. ''What we're attempting to do,'' Ms. Montesi said, ''is provide an option for people of limited income who want to continue living in their own homes but who need to supplement their income.'' According to figures from the State Housing Department, about 400 accessory apartments have been created each year since 1982, when it started keeping records. The apartments are most popular in urban areas, according to the Housing Department. Last year, 51 accessory apartments were approved by building permit in New Haven, 48 in Danbury, 39 in Bridgeport, 37 in Stamford, 28 in Greenwich and 16 in Hartford. In Stamford, however, a recent residents' initiative voted down the ordinance allowing accessory apartments, said Richard S. Eigen, staff assistant for the Housing Task Force for Fairfield County 2000. ''I was surprised when we first heard about it,'' he said. ''But my experience people who live in areas of very small lots often oppose accessory apartments. ''A lot of people think this is going to lead to four or five cars in each yard and more traffic ln local streets,'' Mr. Eigen said. ''A lot of people are afraid of that overcrowding.'' He added, however, that low-interest financing for accessory apartments will be a good program for other southwest Connecticut communities that allow them, because of the severe housing shortage in that area. ''The committee is looking at a number of directions we should take to ease the housing shortage,'' he said, ''and accessory apartments are one area you always look at.'' Housing and planning officials say there are many more accessory apartments not reported in the state housing statistics because of zoning that prohibits accessory apartments or excessively restricts them. Duncan M. Graham, director of the Central Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments, said a recent study of 47 communities in western Connecticut showed that only 16 allowed accessory apartments, and that of those, most impose restrictions that severely limited who could construct them. WHERE there are restrictions, Mr. Graham said, illegal development of accessory apartments is encouraged. ''It's too bad there have to be so many restrictions,'' he added, ''because from a planning standpoint, accessory apartments are a good way to create affordable rentals in towns where rental apartments might be scarce, and help homeowners reduce the cost of ownership.'' Marguerite P. Reich, director of the Windham Regional Planning Agency, said that in recent years, several towns in that area have adopted ordinances that allow accessory apartments of one type of another. ''More and more towns are starting to specifically address the issue,'' she said, ''as more and more people come before them asking to create accessory apartments.'' Ms. Montesi said the authority hoped that the new program would spur more communities to relax their regulations regarding accessory apartments. ''Our role is to stimulate the housing market, but our role is somewhat limited,'' she said. Ms. Montesi added, ''We're not going to take an advocacy role in this, we're not going to encourage towns to change the zoning the regulations to allow for these conversions.'' Ms. Montesi said the loans for accessory apartments must be first mortgages, although some of the funds can be used to pay off existing first mortgages and loan-origination expenses. It can be used to build an apartment within the house or in an addition, she said, and the apartment can be either for a tenant or for the elderly homeowner to occupy himself and free the rest of the house for rental. Those whose incomes are below the authority's limits, with maximums that range from $25,800 to $33,000 depending on the location of the house, qualify for 7 percent financing. Others still quality for the program, but at an 11 percent rate. ''We're trying to make the program as flexible as we can,'' Ms. Montesi said. She said the program is the second operated by the authority geared solely to elderly people. Two years ago, the authority began writing reverse annuity mortgages of as much as $100,000, which provides elderly people with a regular income. That mortgage is paid if the house is sold. Of the 230 mortgages totaling $12 million disbursed so far under that program, the average recipient is 74 years old with an income of $10,200, Ms. Montesi said. The average house in that program is valued at $119,000, and the average mortgage is $70,000, she said.
