685|1987\01\04|Church's Housing Plan Unsettles the East Village|THE parishioners at St. George's Ukrainian Catholic Church dazzled the East Village a decade ago with a new house of worship whose gold domes and decorative paintings befitted its Byzantine heritage. But now the church wants to build again, and people in the neighborhood want it to stop.|THE parishioners at St. George's Ukrainian Catholic Church dazzled the East Village a decade ago with a new house of worship whose gold domes and decorative paintings befitted its Byzantine heritage. But now the church wants to build again, and people in the neighborhood want it to stop. THE parishioners at St. George's Ukrainian Catholic Church dazzled the East Village a decade ago with a new house of worship whose gold domes and decorative paintings befitted its Byzantine heritage. But now the church wants to build again, and people in the neighborhood want it to stop. The proposed building, a 16-story structure with church facilities on the first four floors and 96 cooperative units above, is intended to help house Ukrainian parishioners who have recently come back to the area. ''I am responsible for the welfare of my community,'' said the Rev. Patrick Paschak, ''not only spiritually, but socially. We've always had this area as a center of our activities. We're trying to restore our community life, and housing is a key need.'' The 85,000-square-foot tower would rise next door to the church, which is at 33 East Seventh Street between Second and Third Avenues, on a site that is now used as a church parking lot. A three-story convent owned by St. George's nextto the lot would be torn down for added space. But the co-op building would exceed in size what is permitted under the zoning law by 58,000 square feet. The church has applied to the Board of Standards and Appeals for six variances affecting light, air, distances between buildings and bulk, among other things. A hearing date has not been set yet. Opponents of the building - mostly members of Community Board 3, which rejected the plan in September, and the Sixth and Seventh Streets Block Association - say it is not only the size that would overwhelm the block, now composed mostly of four- to six-story tenements. The prices are too high, they contend, the admissions policy discriminatory and the precedent, in terms of future development, is a dangerous one. ''We do think they have a right to build, but we want to keep this from becoming another high-rent, high-rise neighborhood,'' said Carol Joyce, president of the block association. ''There are a lot of people on fixed incomes who are really terrified. We want to prevent what we see as an inevitable snowballing of developers.'' The issue of discrimination may prove the thorniest of all for the church. The co-ops are to be built for parishioners only. However, a city administrative code forbids all forms of discrimination in housing, which would include exclusive occupancy based on creed or national origin - the two kinds most likely to apply in this instance. Planned are 36 studios averaging 450 square feet, 36 one-bedrooms with about 700 square feet and 24 two-bedrooms with 950 feet. They are expected to cost between $100,000 to $250,000. The architect is Philip P. Agusta & Associates of Forest Hills, Queens. Father Paschak said the money generated from the sales of the co-ops would pay for the church facilities, which include a rectory, community room, apartments for nuns and priests, administrative offices, a chapel, a library and quarters for the pastor. ''They keep saying they have saved the neighborhood,'' said Miriam Friedlander, a councilwoman for lower Manhattan, referring to the parishioners. ''Well, building an expensive group of co-ops for a particular group is not saving the community. That's not the spirit we want here.'' Partly to placate the community but also to provide cheaper housing for poor or elderly Ukrainian parishioners, St. George's has said it will renovate two tenements that it owns across the street into 20 low-income rental units. Those buildings, at 27 and 33 East Seventh Street, are now used for priests' apartments and offices, but would be vacated once the new building opens. THERE are about 25,000 Ukrainians living in the area, which stretches roughly between Third Avenue and Avenue A and 14th and Houston Streets, according to Father Paschak. At one time, there were many more. In the late 1940's and early 1950's, thousands left their homeland because of political and religious oppression under the Soviet government. In the United States they established communities in such cities as Chicago, Detroit, Philadelphia, Rochester, N.Y., Hartford and New York, joining an earlier wave of Ukrainians that had emigrated around 1912. ''Even though they were professional people, the Ukrainian immigrants had to take menial work,'' Father Paschak explained. ''But when their children grew up and got education and better jobs, they moved to Queens, Long Island and New Jersey, while the parents stayed. Now the children want to come back.'' Those ''children,'' most of them now parents themselves, have slowly been reclaiming their roots. The young parents, Father Paschak said, are forming closer ties with East Seventh Street, the main artery of the Ukrainian community. They attend the church and send their children to the two Ukrainian schools right behind St. George's on East Sixth Street, he said. ''Ten years ago, housing in this area was rundown and terrible,'' said Dr. Maria Chaban, a 38-year-old physician who recently moved to the East Village from Forest Hills, Queens, with her husband, Bohdan, an engineer, and their three children. ''But a lot of us would now like to continue the tradition by moving back. ''There is so much in this community for the children - Ukrainian schools and theater, folk music and dancing,'' Dr. Chaban continued, standing outside the church after a Saturday evening service. ''It's important to me that my children are bilingual. The culture adds depth and flavor to their lives.'' But some see this as an attempt to foster exclusivity. ''They're attempting to pit their people against others,'' said Ms. Friedlander, the councilwoman. The housing discrimination code contains an exemption for religious institutions. But according to Joan M. Thompson, director of the Fair Housing Division of the New York City Commission on Human Rights, it does not pertain to the proposed co-op. ''The exemption speaks to educational purposes,'' Ms. Thompson said. ''For example, if a temple wanted to build units to house rabinnical students, that would be acceptable. But this building would be in conflict with the city's human rights law.'' Defending the conventionally financed $10 million project, Father Paschak said, ''If we were using funds from the city, we would have to open it up. But this is like building a home for your family.'' Further, anyone can join the parish, regardless of nationality, he said. All the services at the Catholic church are conducted in Ukrainian, however.
