686|1987\01\04|Island Park|MICHAEL PARENTE and his family first vacationed in the tiny seashore community of Island Park in the summer of 1953 for a brief respite from the sweltering streets of Brooklyn. The vacation never ended.|MICHAEL PARENTE and his family first vacationed in the tiny seashore community of Island Park in the summer of 1953 for a brief respite from the sweltering streets of Brooklyn. The vacation never ended. MICHAEL PARENTE and his family first vacationed in the tiny seashore community of Island Park in the summer of 1953 for a brief respite from the sweltering streets of Brooklyn. The vacation never ended. ''We liked Island Park so much, we moved right from our summer bungalow into a new home,'' said Mr. Parente, now the mayor of the Nassau County village. ''And we never went back to Brooklyn.'' What was once a summer haven for people like the Parentes is now home to 10,000 residents of the village and the neighborhoods of Barnum Island and Harbor Isle. All share the same school district and post office and are considered part of the Island Park community. But Barnum Island and Harbor Isle residents only pay taxes to the Town of Hempstead. Residents of Island Park, a good number of whom know each other by name, say the village blooms in the summer, when its small beaches are open and children fish in the many canals. The island climate is one reason people settle in the South Shore village, where southwest winds keep it cool in the summer and warmer than inland in the winter. It probably also attracted the Rockaway Indian tribe, which once hunted and gathered shellfish there. Real-estate brokers say a mix of affordable housing and exclusive waterfront homes are major attractions of the community, which is bordered on the north by Oceanside and in the south by Long Beach (to the east and west, channels and marshland stretch away to Cedarhurst and Jones Beach, respectively). In the heart of the less-than-a-square-mile village, some of the three-bedroom, bungalow-like homes, which date from the 1930's, cost $100,000 to $125,000, said Henry Hastava, owner of Hastava Real Estate. Three-bedroom ranches with water views sell for about $150,000. A Long Island Lighting Company plant that straddles the border of Oceanside and Island Park is a prime ratable and helps keep the property-tax rate low; a tiny three-bedroom house that sold recently for $119,000, for example, pays taxes of $1,000 a year. The cost of housing is slightly higher in Harbor Isle and Barnum Island, where the homes are newer and larger. Development started in both areas in the early 1950's. Houses that face canals on Island Park - a mix of split-levels, colonials and contemporary cedar - cost $300,000 to $350,000 and those on the bayfront sell for $400,000, according to Roberta Scully, owner of Scully Realty, a local brokerage. Summertime activity revolves around the water, and it is just as common to see a boat on most driveways as it is to see a car. ''On one Island Park waterfront the sun sets, and on the other the sun rises,'' Mrs. Scully said. The community, which has four places of worship - a synogogue and Greek Orthodox, Methodist and Roman Catholic churches - has large Italian and Greek populations. Their ethnic celebrations - a Greek festival in August and the four-day Feast of San Gennaro in September - are the annual social highlights. Barnum Island, named for Phineas T. Barnum, the circus impresario, who owned land there, is about the size of Island Park, as is Harbor Isle, which is connected to the village by two small bridges. Some streets on Barnum Island are separated by small canals, where homeowners can dock their boats or lease the space to others. TUCKED in a corner of Barnum Island, facing Reynolds Channel and Long Beach Hospital, are the Yacht Harbor Condominiums, only a few years old. Town-house resales cost about $200,000, Mrs. Scully said. Most units have three bedrooms and bathrooms with skylights. Across the street, plans for housing the elderly are being considered for the little undeveloped land that remains in the community. No one plan has yet jelled. ''We take care of our senior citizens as well as our young people,'' Mayor Parente said. A 40-unit apartment building for the elderly was constructed a few years ago with the help of village and Federal funds, and the county and Catholic charities furnish daily hot lunches at the American Legion lounge, where many elderly residents gather in the afternoons to play bridge. For young couples, 40 one-family homes were also built under a Housing and Urban Development program in which the Federal Government matches village money to establish affordable homes for first-time homeowners. Some were built on Parente Lane, a new street, named for the mayor, that was created to make space in the village. Mary and Richard Veit recently bought one for $130,000. ''The prices were right,'' said the 28-year-old Mrs. Veit. ''We love the area because it's quiet, clean and pretty and the people seem close. It's a good place to bring up children.'' Island Park has one of the county's smallest school districts, with a total of 1,270 students. They attend Frances X. Hegarty School for pre-kindergarten through third grade and the Lincoln Orens School for fourth through eighth grades. High-school students take a 20-minute bus ride to West Hempstead High School, outside the Island Park district. George Marr, the Island Park district superintendent, said bus service, sometimes until 9 P.M., assures students involved in extracurricular activities of transportation home. Having a small district can produce large results, Mr. Marr said. Average class size is 19 students. Among the variety of special programs available are classes for the gifted, remedial services and an outdoor-education program that provides overnight nature-study trips to Suffolk County. Eighty-three percent of the students in the district go on to higher education. A 30-year tradition in the district is the eighth-graders' annual pilgrimage to Washington, where they learn firsthand about the nation's Capital with Island Park's own Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato as tour guide. A sign saying, ''Welcome to Island Park, the home of U.S. Senator Al D'Amato,'' greets visitors to the community. Island Park's village board is governed by Mr. Parente and four trustees. Many residents work for the county, as Mr. D'Amato did, but for those who commute to Manhattan, a monthly L.I.R.R. ticket costs $123 for the 45-minute ride. THE village beach on Waterfront Road has a new gazebo with picnic benches for family barbecues. Most children participate in a summer recreation program which includes arts and crafts classes and swimming lessons at Hog Creek for a minimal charge. While they swim, their mothers can take advantage of exercise classes on the sand. Harbor Isle has its own small beach and playground. On the outskirts of Barnum Island, Shell Creek Park offers a ballpark, basketball court and four tennis courts. Entrance to beaches and facilities cost residents less than $5 per season. Nonresidents must pay admission each time they visit. McCluskey's Steakhouse is a popular village restaurant, as is Prudente's, which offers Italian cuisine. Channel 80, next to the Long Beach bridge on Reynolds Channel, draws both the singles crowd and families for Sunday brunch. The Lady 80, a motor yacht docked outside the restaurant, features dancing and drinking for summer patrons who often arrive by private plane or moor their boats in Reynolds Channel. In the summertime, customers form lines outside Jordan Lobster Farms on the corner of Waterview Road to buy fresh or prepared seafood. People also wait in line at Custom Bakers, an Island Park institution since 1944, for heavy Italian cheesecake and deep-dish fruit pies. Light industry, some boat showrooms and marinas can be found along Long Beach Road and Austin Boulevard, the village's two main streets. ''It's no wonder that we have such an in-bred community,'' Mr. Parente said. ''It's human nature that when you find something good, you just want to keep it.''  SHOWMAN'S HOME: 'A PIECE OF OUR HISTORY' In 1889, Phineas T. Barnum bought about five acres of land in Island Park and the neighborhood of Barnum Island to be the winter home for his traveling circus. Village historians say he chose the area because of its proximity to the city and because it was quiet. His entourage included members of his family, performers and various show animals. The animals were caged in what was known as ''Mealey's Camp,'' which included stables and sheds off what is now Austin Boulevard, near Southard Road, where Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's family now lives. Nearby, Barnum built a grand, white-frame mansion with a large porch for his ailing sister, Phoebe. Five years later, the mansion, which overlooked Hog Creek and Island Park Beach, was sold and converted into the 30-room Island Park Hotel. The hotel, which served businessmen and wealthy families vacationing at the shore, burned to the ground in the mid-60's. ''When I was growing up, they used to tell the kids that if you dig deep enough, you can find bones from Barnum's elephants in the ground,'' said Harvey Gertler, president of the Chamber of Commerce. ''It's just a piece of our history.''  IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN
