687|1987\01\04|Q and A|Mortgage Tax on a Co-op  Question: When my husband and I closed on an equity loan on our co-op apartment, we paid a $600 mortgage tax to the title company, which it said would be disbursed to New York State. Later we realized that there is no mortgage on a co-op but a loan that is a lien not on real property but on shares of the co-op corporation.|Mortgage Tax on a Co-op  Question: When my husband and I closed on an equity loan on our co-op apartment, we paid a $600 mortgage tax to the title company, which it said would be disbursed to New York State. Later we realized that there is no mortgage on a co-op but a loan that is a lien not on real property but on shares of the co-op corporation. Mortgage Tax on a Co-op  Question: When my husband and I closed on an equity loan on our co-op apartment, we paid a $600 mortgage tax to the title company, which it said would be disbursed to New York State. Later we realized that there is no mortgage on a co-op but a loan that is a lien not on real property but on shares of the co-op corporation. Neither the title company's lawyer nor the bank's lawyer could explain why it had been collected. Are we due a refund? . . . M. J., Rego Park, Queens  Answer: No, according to David L. Smith, a real estate lawyer with the firm of Shaw and Reed. The first lien-holder on your co-op, he said, is the bank that issued the original co-op loan and as such, it took possession of the stock certificates and of the proprietary lease at the closing. The bank that issued your equity loan is in a secondary position. ''To protect its position as the junior lienholder,'' Mr. Smith said, ''your bank insisted that a security agreement covering the stock, the proprietary lease and fixtures be recorded with the City Register as evidence of its claim.'' The City Register's position, in turn, is that when these instruments are recorded, a mortgage recording tax is paid. ''This was a superconservative position for the bank to take,'' Mr. Smith said. ''Many banks do not want to issue equity loans on cooperatives, but when they do, it is standard for them to secure their second position by requiring that financing statements be filed.''  Reverse Mortgages  Question: We are a retired couple who live in our own home in a good neighborhood, but we have a limited income. We have heard that some banks will provide a ''reverse mortgage'' that will help older people live better. Do any banks in New York offer this type of loan? . . . K. W., Queens  Answer: The loans to which you are referring are known as reverse annuity mortgage loans. Some financial institutions began offering them a few years ago to allow elderly homeowners to turn the equity in their homes into income while continuing to live in them. The loan principal is paid to the homeowner in monthly installments, and the bank is reimbursed with interest in a single payment at the end of the loan period when the home is sold or the owner dies. In New York State, these loans at present are available only to qualifying elderly residents of Long Island, who must apply either through the Nassau County Department of Senior Citizen Affairs or the nonprofit Family Service League, which is based in Huntington in Suffolk County.  Rent on Co-op Sublet  Question: Is there any restriction on the amount of rent the owner of a co-op apartment can charge when subletting the apartment? . . . G. G., Manhattan  Answer: According to Thomas R. Viola, a spokesman for the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, the only restriction would be in the case of a renter-occupied unit in a rent-regulated building converted under a noneviction plan. When any rent-regulated apartment is sublet, the rent may be no more than 10 percent beyond than the regular rent. The owner of a rent-stabilized co-op may not unreasonably withhold consent to a sublet, and the unit may be sublet for two years out of any four-year period. If the unit is rent-controlled, the owner need not consent to a sublet unless that right was specified in the original lease.
