688|1987\01\04|Yorktown Closes the Door on Condos|CONDOMINIUMS are springing up all over Westchester - but not in Yorktown.|CONDOMINIUMS are springing up all over Westchester - but not in Yorktown. CONDOMINIUMS are springing up all over Westchester - but not in Yorktown. In 1985, Yorktown quietly decided that condominiums were not paying their way in taxes and that no more should be built. The Town Supervisor, Nancy Elliott, said condominiums produced only two-thirds as much tax revenue as identical town houses in ''fee-simple'' ownership, in which owners have title to the land under their property instead of a share of all property. As a result of the town policy, builders have switched current projects from condominiums to fee-simple town houses; for future construction, they have turned back to single-family houses, which have long been the mainstay of home builders in Yorktown. A trend has become evident in the figures of the Building Department and the Planning Board. In 1985, builders completed 69 single-family houses and 300 condominiums that were under construction when the policy changed. In 1986, the Planning Board gave final approval for 174 fee-simple town houses, 140 single-family houses and nine two-family houses. Among the recent applications that have reached the preliminary approval stage, none were for town houses or apartments of any kind. The only ones were for 124 single-family homes and three two-family homes. The difference between condominiums and fee-simple town houses is a result of a legal oddity, but it meant a loss of revenue to the town and school district, Mrs. Elliott said. Robert P. Killeen, the Town Assessor, said the owner of an average condominium pays $2,000 to $2,500 a year in taxes, the owner of a fee-simple town house pays $3,200 to $3,500 and the owner of a single-family home pays an average of $4,000. So far as buyers are concerned, the units look the same and cost the same. The difference between a condominium and fee-simple town house is what Mr. Killeen called ''a postage-stamp-size lot.'' While condominium owners own only their units and a share of all the land, including roads and recreation areas, the fee-simple owners are halfway between owners of houses and condominiums. The fee-simple owners own what is known as the footprint below the building and a small garden in front and back, for a total of about 25 by 100 feet, or about 1/16 acre. They pay taxes not only on that piece of land, but on a different basis on the unit itself, which accounts for most of the increase in taxes. The difference arises from a 22-year-old state law that requires that condominiums be assessed as if they were rental apartments, rather than on the basis of market value, as other residential property is assessed. The law was enacted when the only condominiums and cooperatives were apartments that had been converted from rental apartments, which are assessed on the basis of the income they produce. When they were converted, the old basis was kept on the theory that the assessment should be the same regardless of whether the building was owned by one person or 100. Recently the law has been criticized by assessors in several towns as illogical because the new condominiums were never rental units. The assessment must be set on some assumed rental, and in some communities there is no comparable rental unit to use as a basis for assessment. Mark Phelan, spokesman for the Builders Institute, an association of Westchester and Putnam County builders, contractors and apartment owners, defends the current method of assessing condominiums. ''We recognize that condominiums get a preferential assessment, but even with that benefit, the town still gets a benefit and no costs,'' he said. ''Condominiums pay for their own services and their own recreation, and they produce almost no schoolchildren.'' The New York Times/Alan Zale But Marc Gerber, a Chappaqua builder who is directly affected by the new Yorktown policy, said he was not perturbed by it. He has built about 200 condominiums in recent years and is planning a development called Bridle Ridge in Yorktown, which will have 70 single-family houses and 70 town houses. He said it was a ''close call'' for both builders and buyers as to which is preferable - condominiums or fee-simple town houses in which residents form a homeowners' association. ''I DON'T think these simple units are harder to sell, even though they have higher taxes,'' he said. ''In a homeowners' association, the roads are owned by the town, which pays to maintain them and plow them. In a condominium, the roads are pri-rrHunter Brook, among the last condominium complexes being built in Yorktown; Nancy Elliott, Supervisor. vate, and the condo owners have to pay to maintain them, which means a higher maintenance fee.'' He said that in a homeowners' association, owners have control over their own front and back gardens and can make their own decisions, for example, on landscaping. At the same time, he said, the associations can enact rules on outside appearances that are as strict as those in condominium complexes, which ban exterior alterations. Yorktown enacted its regulations by policy, not by law, and has simply told builders that it prefers homeowners' associations. ''We don't have to approve any particular type of building,'' Mrs. Elliott said. ''If builders want to come in and be part of our community, they should build what we think is right. We haven't had any trouble about it.'' Yorktown, which was the first town in northern Westchester to permit the building of condominiums, has 1,900 either completed, under construction or approved for construction. Jefferson Village, an adults-only condominium complex, is nearing completion, with 900 of its 1,000 units built. About 260 units in four other complexes are complete, and 640 are under construction in what will be the final four complexes: Hunter Brook, on Route 132, and Chalet, Old Yorktown II and Villas on the Lake, all in Lake Mohegan, in the northern part of town. Even town houses in homeowners' associations may not be built in any great numbers in Yorktown in the future, Mrs. Elliott said, ''because we have run out of our nice flat farmland where it was easy to build them.'' The Supervisor also predicted a general swing back to single-family houses in Yorktown. She said she based her prediction not only on statistics offered by planners, but also on her own observations. ''I make my studies standing and watching the crowds at the Yorktown Grange Fair every year,'' she said. ''You get an idea of who's around. I've begun to see a lot of pregnant ladies, and Yorktown has always been a family-oriented town. Families still prefer houses.''  IN WESTCHESTER AND CONNECTICUT
