69|1987\01\01|A MAN'S CASTLE IS HIS HOME|THIRTEEN months ago, just as I despaired of finding a retreat to which I could retire from a world gone mad with materialism, I spotted a magazine real-estate ad for a castle in Tuscany with 365 rooms.|THIRTEEN months ago, just as I despaired of finding a retreat to which I could retire from a world gone mad with materialism, I spotted a magazine real-estate ad for a castle in Tuscany with 365 rooms. THIRTEEN months ago, just as I despaired of finding a retreat to which I could retire from a world gone mad with materialism, I spotted a magazine real-estate ad for a castle in Tuscany with 365 rooms. ''At last,'' I told my wife, ''here's our pied-a-terre.'' She said, ''Imagine spending time in a different room every day of the year!'' Since the alternative, a studio apartment at Lincoln Center with an eat-in closet, cost the same $16.4 million, we bought the castle. ''The kitchen is original,'' said the broker when we arrived last Jan. 1. ''It dates to 1300, when the Medicis moved in - they had first refusal -so it needs a little work.'' After inspecting the ancient kitchen layout -nine pantries, buttery, butchery, bakery, silver vault, salad bar and takeout counter - we agreed, and installed a hot plate in the baronial winter dining room next to the three-ox spit. My wife wanted one in the summer dining room, too, but I said two hot plates were a waste of money. In the glassed-in cloister, we studied the kitchen garden, with its Asti spumante fountains watering tortellini bushes, and rows of cannelloni alla toscana around a minestrone pond where some prosciutto grazed peacefully. The broker told us, ''In the year 800, Charlemagne lived in this fortification, just after it was built.'' That night, I encountered Charlemagne's ghost on the loggia. He said, ''I've walked these halls for 1,172 winters, so maybe I can give you a household tip.'' I said, ''What is it?'' He said, ''Get central heating fast.'' A week later, after touring all 365 rooms, I felt we needed a finished basement. My wife wondered what for. I said, ''Just a conversation piece.'' So we furnished the game room with a stadium-size gridiron and a canasta table in case my aunt from Mamaroneck visited. When my wife, joking, asked how we could afford such palatial splendor, I said, ''We'll do what the leftover English aristocracy does to rescue country houses - put in a restaurant.'' Pointing to the castle's crenelated facade, I explained, ''Above that 14th-century clock, next to the Bernini angel, we'll hang a neon sign that flashes 'Eats.' '' Life hit a low point when the restaurant's custom dinner service displaying our coat of arms in gold arrived from Limoges. I checked the motto and found a typographical error: ''Don't Thread on Me.'' Business aside, our No. 1 problem was the 299 bedrooms - and no bathrooms. We bought a rollaway bed and dressers on casters so they could be moved from bedroom to bedroom every day. Each morning, we are carried down two flights on a sedan chair to the bath in the knights' hall; this is hard on the help, because we have only one upstairs servant. We were embarrassed at our first banquet. It is somewhat inconvenient for early-departing guests when 250 coats are piled on one bed, especially when three drinks make you forget where the bed is that day. Since then, guests have entered through the armory, where there are 500 antlers, and hang up their own: moose for men's coats, deer for women's. At breakfast one day, my wife clicked on the microphone at her end of the refectory table and said, ''What should we do with the empty 400-foot by 600-foot Grand Salon?'' I was baffled: ''Which room is that?'' She answered in a flash: ''That three-story one with the pediments carved by Norman artisans resting on mock-Corinthian capitals above Carrara marble pilasters. The one with the Gothic vaulting in Moorish domes in the manner of Bramante. The one with trompe l'oeil bas reliefs offsetting Flemish black-and-white checkerboard paving edged by arabesques.'' ''Oh,'' I said. ''That one. Let's make it the den.'' We cut the travel between the castle's east and west wings to 15 minutes by installing two one-car IRT trains, built to scale. The system, under the picture gallery, works well, although the express often arrives on the local track. Of course, we never use it at night. We modernized the throne room's bell pull. One yank of the ceiling-high brocade sash still brings the falconer, and two yanks, the scribe; but three gets us the computer repairman; four, the sommelier with Chianti, and five, a delivery of ''pizza everything'' (five and a half means ''hold the pepperoni''). The dungeon was impossible; we couldn't do a thing with it except hang dehumidifers from the manacles. Our moat is a godsend. Each night after we park we hoist the drawbridge; the car radio has never been stolen again. Actually, there are two moats - fresh and salt water - one stocked with carp (we sell to the Chinese restaurants in Montepulciano), the other with maatjes herring (for our Sunday mornings). By the eighth month, homesick for apartment-house ways, we hired a superintendent - fully expecting him to ignore crucial repairs. (He does.) Should we have moved to Lincoln Center? No. Our mahogany-paneled library has become the entertainment center. From speakers under El Greco's pastel idylls of prancing nymphs, music flows: Gregorian chants, Fats Waller singing ''Ain't Misbehavin'.'' Wearing smoking jacket and bunny slippers, I watch the giant TV screen that drops over the self-portrait Czar Nicholas II gave my grandfather as an emigration gift. In the last 365 days, we've had problems: criticism of our new mural over the grand staircase, ''The Mets' Gary Carter Traps a Pop Fly at the Visitors' Dugout''; the $5,000 Windex bill for the Hall of Mirrors, and landscaping cost overruns for the 400 acres of Astroturf. The road to Florence lies beyond the sequoias we imported from California, our private zoo's lion pit (which frightens the postman) and a replica of the Triborough Bridge we erected over a sweet brook. ''We need a mailbox,'' I said. ''How about japanned tin mounted on two plaster griffins with acanthus-leaf wings? They can spray green water skyward whenever we get a bank statement.'' ''It's a bad idea,'' my wife said. ''The neighbors might think we're nouveaux riches.''
