691|1987\01\04|New U.S. Tariffs Stir the Trade Wars|The United States imposed duties on wine, cheese, gin and brandy imported from the European Community. The move is sure to increase trade tensions. The United States is retaliating against tariffs on American grain exports to Spain, but the Community threatened new retaliation in the form of wider grain tariffs.|The United States imposed duties on wine, cheese, gin and brandy imported from the European Community. The move is sure to increase trade tensions. The United States is retaliating against tariffs on American grain exports to Spain, but the Community threatened new retaliation in the form of wider grain tariffs. The United States imposed duties on wine, cheese, gin and brandy imported from the European Community. The move is sure to increase trade tensions. The United States is retaliating against tariffs on American grain exports to Spain, but the Community threatened new retaliation in the form of wider grain tariffs. Some economists called the United States move a bold one by President Reagan to deal with a particularly thorny problem, but others say American consumers are the ones who will have to pay. Separately, the United States is dropping duty-free status for about $3 billion in goods from Korea, Japan and some developing nations, saying the need for duty-free status was greater elsewhere. The United States justifies its actions in part by pointing to the trade deficit, which hit a record $19.2 billion in November. The gap had been narrowing for several months as more aggressive American marketing and the lower dollar began to have an effect, so the turnaround stunned most economists. It came on a surge in imports, caused in part by companies ordering goods to beat the new tax bill and the new tax on imports that took effect Dec. 1. Still, the worsening deficit is sure to increase protectionist inclinations in Congress. Canada will impose a 15 percent export tax on lumber, replacing a 15 percent tariff that was imposed by the United States, which said Canada was unfairly subsidizing its lumber exports. While Ottawa would prefer to have no penalty at all, officials there believed a tax at home was better than a tariff that went to the United States. But the lumber industry in Canada and many politicians there bitterly condemned the tax, saying it would cause unemployment and would set a dangerous precedent. Japanese chip prices were cut by the United States, which sets the level at which the chips can be sold here under a trade agreement that went into effect in July. The cut will probably please the Japanese, who have been accused of dumping their chips. The dollar plunged on the trade reports amid thin year-end trading as currency traders moved into other currencies. The drop led to a surge in gold prices, traditionally a haven when currency prices are unsteady. Gold passed $400 an ounce. Leading indicators jumped 1.2 percent in November, but analysts disagreed on the significance. Most noted that the new tax bill's stricter depreciation and capital expenditures provisions were spurring companies to spend before Jan. 1, but others saw some underlying strength. . . . Factory orders surged 4.1 percent, mainly on military orders. The gain came on the heels of two disheartening drops, and was the biggest jump in two years. . . . Sales of new homes fell 2.2 percent, but sales of existing homes hit a seven-year high. . . . Spending on new construction fell seven-tenths of 1 percent. Stocks began the year on an up note with a 31.36-point gain that canceled a year-ending slump. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 3.79 for the four-day trading week, ending at 1,927.31. Short-term interest rates rose sharply as traders hustled to cover year-end financing needs. McDonnell Douglas will build its long-delayed wide-body jet, the MD-11, keeping it in the business of large passenger jets. The plane is a more efficient, larger-capacity jet than McDonnell's DC-10. It had hesitated to build the jet in view of stiff competition from Airbus and Boeing, but decided to go ahead when orders picked up. Still, most analysts say the plane will produce little profit. Merrill Lynch and I.B.M. dropped a joint venture to furnish the financial community with computerized information. While financial professionals have long been considered a perfect audience for such sophisticated services, and while the combination of I.B.M.'s computer expertise and Merrill's financial expertise seemed to make an irresistible combination, the costs were just too high and the market too small. The venture, known as Imnet, was announced in 1984. USX will write off $300 million in the fourth quarter as a result of early redemption of the bonds it issued when it bought Marathon Oil for $2.9 billion in 1982. And it said it was still conducting talks with Carl C. Icahn. Unisys will write off between $250 million and $275 million in the fourth quarter as part of the cost of the merger of Burroughs and Sperry that created the company. Esquire was purchased by Hearst, and an American Express unit bought the fledgling New York Woman as part of the break-up of the Esquire Magazine Group. Hearst also publishes Town & Country, Popular Mechanics and Cosmopolitan. Citicorp and Japan's top bank, Daiichi Kangyo, are considering a joint venture that would allow customers of either bank to receive full services at both. It would be the first such venture between American and Japanese banks. The financial adviser to Guinness, Morgan Grenfell, resigned that business amid a widening stock scandal. The British Government is investigating the $3.6 billion acquisition by Guinness of Distillers, apparently focusing on possible manipulation of Guinness's stock price. Miscellanea. First Chicago is buying Beneficial National Bank USA, a big credit card operation, for $247 million. . . . People Express shareholders approved the $115 million sale to Texas Air. . . . Robert Holmes a Court appeared to be winning the battle with Rupert Murdoch for control of Australia's largest newspaper group. WEEK IN BUSINESS
