692|1987\01\04|Creating Shangri-La On the Hudson|ARTHUR E. IMPERATORE, looking imperial, as he always does, nervously drummed his fingers on the table. Smoke seemed about to issue from his ears. He has a famous short fuse. He said stiffly, ''We've got a lot of money sitting around here. I hear the clock ticking.''|ARTHUR E. IMPERATORE, looking imperial, as he always does, nervously drummed his fingers on the table. Smoke seemed about to issue from his ears. He has a famous short fuse. He said stiffly, ''We've got a lot of money sitting around here. I hear the clock ticking.'' ARTHUR E. IMPERATORE, looking imperial, as he always does, nervously drummed his fingers on the table. Smoke seemed about to issue from his ears. He has a famous short fuse. He said stiffly, ''We've got a lot of money sitting around here. I hear the clock ticking.'' This meeting - being held at the Manhattan offices of the architectural firm of Schuman, Lichtenstein, Claman & Efron - had been called to discuss details of a crescent-shaped apartment building Mr. Imperatore intends to build on two miles of land he owns that winds through Weehawken and West New York on the New Jersey banks of the Hudson River. It would be the first stirrings of his ideal city, which he plans to call Port Imperial. He is basically a novice at real estate development. He has never built anything other than one housing project in Cliffside Park, N.J., and some truck terminals. Still, at 61, Mr. Imperatore sees no reason why an aging but active trucking magnate should not become a master builder. The meeting turned to windows. How many should open? How many shouldn't? Views diverged. At one point, Mr. Imperatore interrupted to say, ''You know, we better follow these things up or we're going to be out of time. We can't keep losing a week, a week, a week.'' Mr. Imperatore is worth perhaps $200 million. The money comes from his trucking company, the APA Transport Corporation, which hauls everything imaginable along the East Coast. In the mid-70's, Mr. Imperatore fell into doleful spirits. His mother died. One of his brothers was killed in a helicopter crash. His marriage disintegrated. He was creeping up on his 60's and felt it necessary to ponder succession. So he removed himself from active duties at his company. Needing a project to absorb him, he bought the big parcel of riverfront land in 1981, when wild dogs roamed on it. He got it cheap - $7.75 million - from the liquidators of the Penn Central holdings, and has already watched it multiply many times in value. Since he bought the parcel, he has been moving to create what he refers to as a Shangri-La with a glorious view of the Empire State Building. People who know him are not surprised. He has never thought small. The meeting sputtered along. Mr. Imperatore consulted his watch and announced that he had to get to New Jersey. ''If I said anything insulting,'' he remarked in leaving, ''I meant it.'' Buttoning his raincoat, Mr. Imperatore bustled downstairs, jumped into his Oldsmobile and and began careening at a blood-curdling speed through traffic. ''I drive like a truck driver,'' he said. ''I used to be a truck driver. You look for opportunity and move quickly. You have to make time to get productivity.'' Racing along, working the horn hard, he said, ''I have an esthetic eye that gives me insight and imposes a demand for high-quality esthetics and symmetry. My eye picks up asymmetry and rejects it. I'm a believer that people are affected by their environment much more than they are willing to admit consciously. I'm constantly fighting the battle of beauty and classicism and trying to compromise between what I feel people should require and have and the age of pragmatism. In my work, I'm always trying to think of how to make the world better - better human conduct, better civility, better efficiency, just a better civilization.'' He parked at a small pier on the Hudson River at 38th Street. This was where he had recently begun a ferry service to Weehawken - the first in 20 years - in order to carry commuters to his dream city. He boarded a motorboat, settled behind the wheel and plowed across the river to Arcorp Properties, his Weehawken real estate development company. ''I'm 61,'' he said on the way over. ''I've worked for 50 or 51 years. I've always had an inner drive to accomplish and get things done with creativity, purpose and honesty, with a strong sense of personal discipline and control.'' Mr. Imperatore has a tall, lithe figure, sparse gray hair and a bulbous nose. He often wears a sort of tired, sad look. His voice, which he uses often, is like creaky hinges and his speech is generously laced with swearwords. He treats people well, providing they work harder than they ever thought they could. ''I have great respect for people,'' he said. ''And I demand respect - because I earned it.'' His city, he explained, will be in the ''Greco-Roman tradition.'' It will contain 12,500 housing units, 10 million square feet of office space, a hotel and a cultural center. The cost may reach $6 billion. Construction is expected to span two decades. Mr. Imperatore hopes he'll see it all. In doing his planning, Mr. Imperatore dropped in on more than 50 cities to borrow ideas. Slices of Venice, Copenhagen and Paris will reappear on the New Jersey waterfront: a town square reminiscent of Venice's Piazza San Marco, an 800-foot observation tower derived from a Leonardo da Vinci sketch, a boulevard that some refer to as the ''Champs Elysees of Weehawken,'' an entertainment center mimicking Copenhagen's Tivoli Gardens. Ask him who will live in the city, and Mr. Imperatore responds firmly: ''The world.'' The world must wait, however. Ground-breaking for the first apartment building is not scheduled until September, and Mr. Imperatore faces rabid competition along the waterfront. ''Even if his proposal can succeed on its own, 10 or 15 years down the line it's going to have to withstand competition from all the other developments on the West Bank of the Hudson River,'' said Martin Bierbaum, assistant professor in the graduate public administration program at Rutgers University. ''That area could turn out to be a total disaster.'' ''I think that Arthur Imperatore, while he's a wonderful guy, is really a novice at real estate,'' said Joe Barry, a developer in Hoboken. ''What he's proposing is on such a massive scale that he's not going to have much learning time. You have to do more than throw a lot of money at a project.'' Donald Trump, in a recent television interview, succinctly summed up Mr. Imperatore's chunk of land as ''garbage.'' Mr. Imperatore huffs that anyone who doubts him doesn't know him. He says that he will soon be announcing a joint venture on his property with a large, seasoned developer that will silence a lot of naysayers. Arthur Imperatore wasn't always special. That didn't start, he says, until he was at least 2. When he was 10 he decided to become a millionaire. That was quite a dream for someone who was one of 10 children of an Italian immigrant who ran a grocery store. There was no money in the Imperatore house. The 10 children shared two drab bedrooms. Meals were taken at an ironing board that teetered across two chairs. (Still, there was a regal tradition: In Latin, the family name means emperor.) This was happening in West New York, where Mr. Imperatore was born on July 8, 1925. At 7, Mr. Imperatore helped his family with deliveries. He mopped floors at a candy store. He was a Western Union messenger. He was a Fuller Brush man. He had a bank account when he was 9. He never went to college. ''My interest as a kid was in doing something, making money and putting my family on the map,'' he said. Trucks gave him the opportunity. In 1947, along with four of his brothers, he established the rudiments of APA Transport with two Army surplus trucks operating out of the Imperatore house. Under Mr. Imperatore's tight-fisted rule, the company flourished as one of the industry's most profitable truckers. The New York-New Jersey area is one of the most miserable in the country for labor-management squabbling (his drivers belong to the teamsters union). Yet APA became legendary for stellar management and profitability. In 1985, he says, the company earned $8.4 million on revenues of $98.7 million. APA's stringent hiring policies are perhaps the key to its success. Want to drive an APA truck? You must withstand endless interviews, a drug test, a polygraph test in states that allow it and a week's orientation at no pay. To weed out crooks among new applicants, APA subscribes to 45 daily newspapers, and four people work full-time clipping out stories about arrests. From these, a master roster of dubious names is compiled, which right now lists more than 1.6 million people. Mr. Imperatore remains APA's chairman, but the place is run on a daily basis by its president, Armand Pohan, who is Mr. Imperatore's stepson. Earlier last year, in order to grow, the company bought Sanborn's Motor Express, a Maine trucker. There have been problems melding the two together, since a lot of Sanborn drivers who are not up to APA's standards have left or been let go. One of the most remarkable things about APA is its reputation for being ''clean'' in an industry that is often dirty. ''We don't stand for corruption of any people for any reason,'' Mr. Imperatore said. ''I.B.M., Ross Perot -we didn't copy any of those guys in how to be honest. We invented this stuff down here in the swamps. The Japanese didn't teach me anything. We grew up in the worst kind of crud. The teamster influence? Some of those guys are in prison right now. They tried to strong-arm us. But they didn't. We never bought peace.'' In fact, even the Teamsters seem to approve of Arthur Imperatore. ''He's fair, he's just, he's tough,'' says Walter Shea, an international vice president with the union, who has known Mr. Imperatore for many years. ''We rarely have a grievance with him. If everyone was like Arthur, we probably wouldn't have unions.'' Mr. Imperatore is tougher than nails. But he's also generous to his people. In 1973, for instance, he opened a $1 million recreation center for workers and their families at the APA main terminal in North Bergen. The basketball court is so good that the New Jersey Nets practice on it. Mr. Imperatore treats himself well, too. His immense office at APA is a splendid replica of the drawing room of a 17th-century Venetian prince. ''Nice office, huh?'' he likes to say to visitors. ''I deserve it.'' Until recently, he lived in a mansion perched on a bluff in Fort Lee, N.J., though now he rents an apartment in Manhattan while quarters are being prepared for him in the Arcorp Properties headquarters. He's still separated from his wife and lives alone; he has a son and daughter, who are both in graduate school. He owns a 141-foot yacht, the Imperator, which contains artwork by Boudin, Monet and Pissarro. He likes to float in the yacht down the Hudson, peering at his acreage and smiling contentedly to himself. Mr. Imperatore had to meet someone at the office of a marina that operates on his property. Walking in, he noticed the carpeting was soiled. He barked at the attendant: ''Why is this carpet dirty? That's grease.'' The phone trilled. The attendant picked it up. ''Listen to me,'' Mr. Imperatore snapped. ''Tell whoever it is you'll call back. I'm talking. Get someone to come and clean that.'' Tidiness is a fanaticism of Mr. Imperatore's. At any given time, his coat pockets are apt to be stuffed with sundry balled-up scraps of litter he has spied on the ground. ''You see how dirty the world is and then you come to my property and it's clean,'' he said. ''People enjoy working in a clean, neat environment. I think people deserve that.'' Still fuming about the greasy rug, Mr. Imperatore left the office. He noticed a crumpled Hershey bar wrapper on the ground, picked it up and stashed it in his pocket. ''I want to show you something,'' Arthur Imperatore said, driving through the streets of North Bergen. He pulled up alongside a nondescript two-story house, swung out of the car and punched the bell. This was the house he was born in. Now he owns it. One of his brothers lives in it with his wife. His brother was out, but his wife answered in her bathrobe. ''Oh, Arthur, why don't you give me warning?'' she said. ''I didn't have warning,'' Mr. Imperatore said. The living room was small, plain, crowded. Mr. Imperatore paced about. ''This was where I started,'' he said. ''Ten kids in two rooms. It was a mess.'' ''What my project is about,'' he continued, ''is I want to help the milieu in which I built my business. I made my fortune here and I believe in the community. I have an idea of perfecting a piece of the world.'' ''Some coffee, Arthur?'' his sister-in-law interrupted. ''No time,'' Mr. Imperatore said. ''Gotta go.'' On a gray, snowy day, Arthur Imperatore's car eased to a halt in front of APA headquarters. The letters in the company's name happen to stand for nothing, though employees quip that they are short for ''Always Please Arthur.'' As he threaded his way to his office, Mr. Imperatore called out effusive greetings to the drivers. Some of them he hugged. He asked after the health of relatives. As he mounted the stairs, his eyes were trained on the carpet. ''Look at this,'' he said to one of the vice presidents, and nabbed two pieces of litter. ''You guys let this place go to pot.'' Then he said, ''When I was building the company, I was introduced to a book called 'Acres of Diamonds.' It was about a man who had a great farm but he was restless and greedy and failed to work his farm. So he sold it and the man who bought it worked it and found on the farm the acres of diamonds. The moral is, if you work hard you find opportunities.' He plopped down in his office and stared into the distance. ''Men love to work,'' he said. ''They want leadership and to be taught their work, their craft, to make a better world, a small chunk of immortality by their work.'' ''We bring out the heroism in people,'' he continued. ''I used to do it in a masterful way. I don't know if they're screwing it up now. I think they are, actually.'' After a while, he got into his car to circle the snowy yard. A rule is that drivers have 5 minutes to get their trucks on the road. Most made it. A few dawdled. Mr. Imperatore pulled up alongside a driver who was still getting his truck ready to roll. ''Get out of here,'' he told him. ''You can talk to the freight, but it won't walk.'' ''I know, Arthur, I know,'' the driver said. ''If I weren't in this car, you'd get a snowball,'' Mr. Imperatore said. ''Now get out of here.'' Mr. Imperatore headed for the exit to go to the waterfront. Suddenly, he braked, opened his door and leaned out. He snatched up a gum wrapper and put it in his pocket. TRUCKER TURNED BUILDER: ARTHUR E. IMPERATORE
