693|1987\01\04|THE AX FALLS ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITY|IT seemed like a great idea last October, when the subject first came up. Black Agency Executives, an association of black directors of social service agencies in New York City, would invite about 60 black corporate executives of major national companies to a conference in April. The talk would be of fund raising, of board memberships, of management techniques, of all kinds of subjects on which the two groups could offer mutual assistance.|IT seemed like a great idea last October, when the subject first came up. Black Agency Executives, an association of black directors of social service agencies in New York City, would invite about 60 black corporate executives of major national companies to a conference in April. The talk would be of fund raising, of board memberships, of management techniques, of all kinds of subjects on which the two groups could offer mutual assistance. IT seemed like a great idea last October, when the subject first came up. Black Agency Executives, an association of black directors of social service agencies in New York City, would invite about 60 black corporate executives of major national companies to a conference in April. The talk would be of fund raising, of board memberships, of management techniques, of all kinds of subjects on which the two groups could offer mutual assistance. The idea has since been scuttled. ''The ranks of blacks in corporations have been so decimated there just wouldn't be enough people to come,'' says John N. Odom, B.A.E.'s director. Across the country, black managers have been losing their jobs at an accelerated pace. Executive recruiters report that resumes from discharged black managers are flooding their offices, while assignments to recruit them - or anyone at the middle management level - are few and far between. So far, black engineers, sales managers and others in jobs that deal directly with products have been spared. And most experts say that lower-level black workers, many of whom are in unions, have fared no worse than their white counterparts in the wave of firings sweeping the country. But blacks in public affairs, community relations, human resources - all of the staff-support areas that have become havens for blacks and women trying to make it into the mainstream of corporate America - are finding their jobs, and their paychecks, gone. ''For years, blacks and women were steered into jobs that were not central to the organization,'' said Mary Anne Devanna, research director at the Columbia Business School's Management Institute. ''Now these are precisely the jobs that are being eliminated.'' Members of an increasingly angry black managerial community feel the dismissals have dealt them a one-two punch. They see themselves and their colleagues, far more than white women, back at square one in their careers, often after decades of employment with the same company. And since many of the fired managers were responsible for recruiting and guiding entry-level blacks through the corporate shoals, they say the trend bodes extremely ill for younger black would-be managers. ''The whole country has gone backwards in the sense of equal opportunity,'' said Sheila Clark, 38, a black single parent who last month lost her job as director of career development at CBS Inc. ''It's like a door opened and suddenly it shut in your face.'' Although the corporate ax is falling on managers of all colors and races, black executives say it has fallen disproportionately hard on them as a group. According to David L. Vaughn, president of the National Urban Affairs Council, the number of executive jobs in the New York metropolitan area has shrunk by about 9 percent in the last couple of years. Well over half of the jobs that were eliminated, he says, had been held by blacks - a percentage that far exceeds black representation in managerial jobs. Other black executives cite similar figures. ''Mergers and acquisitions have cut the legs out of the movement of blacks in the corporate world,'' says Sullivan Robinson, head of Associated Black Charities, a 59-member federation of New York social services agencies. ''Corporate America has made a decision to whiten up again. It can't be coincidental. The numbers are just too extreme.'' Although specific numbers are impossible to unearth, most employment experts say it is because of weak information-gathering methods, not because the figures are wrong. ''We have little information about what's happening in specific occupations and little information about minorities, so hard data related to both are really hard to come by,'' explains Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, regional commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. But calls to several universities, management associations, and executive search firms turned up a widespread perception of a vicious cycle: Black executives are often promoted to head Equal Employment Opportunity compliance and other minority-related areas, and because these jobs have little immediate impact on corporate bottom lines, they are the first to go in any cutback. ''Companies wind up so worried about quarterly profits that they cut out not only fat but fundamentally important social commitments,'' says James A. F. Stoner, professor of management at Fordham University's Graduate School of Business. The pressure seems to be off from Washington. Many companies report that inspections by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, a major enforcement arm for anti-discrimination regulations, are far less thorough than they were in previous Administrations, and that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is not living up to its rules. Clarence Thomas, chairman of the E.E.O.C., insists that ''the facts belie any such statements'' and that this year his agency filed a record number of lawsuits and class actions on behalf of individuals who charged discrimination. But blatant discrimination is not the issue in American business today, most blacks contend. And business experts tend to agree more with the perceptions of the black community than with the E.E.O.C. ''Politically, there is no longer a guardian angel for affirmative action,'' said Paul Hirsch, a professor at the University of Chicago. Newly unemployed blacks are more blunt. ''There's a consensus that E.E.O. was never really a part of the corporation, just something that had to be done under a different Administration,'' said Joseph E. Burgess, 51, a former assistant vice president of human resources at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company who was, in his words, ''reorganized out of a job'' in February. IN A sense, corporations can argue a degree of color-blindness in their widespread staff cuts. The huge number of mergers in recent years has meant wholesale elimination of duplicate jobs of all types, along the theory that no company needs two controllers or two heads of investor relations. At the same time, manufacturing companies are facing an unprecedented flood of low-priced import competition, and have been slashing their payrolls in an attempt to get costs low enough so that they can compete effectively. Airlines, telecommunications companies, and other companies operating in newly deregulated environments are finding unfamiliar price competition threatening their existence if they do not get costs down. The fickleness of management theory has also had a deleterious impact on staff jobs, including E.E.O.-type positions. In the last decade, management consultants, professors and other self-styled experts preached the virtues of formal strategic planning, psychologically oriented training programs, internal consulting groups, and other staff support functions. Corporations listened and acted accordingly, with the result that these staff jobs flourished in number and salary. Now, though, theories along the lines of those espoused by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr. in the best-selling ''In Search of Excellence'' have glorified companies with super-lean headquarters staffs and with decision-making done by the line managers, the people who actually run the manufacturing operations or market the products. The overall result has been a nationwide downsizing of corporate staffs, usually described as trimming the fat from management. And, black executives charge, it is their jobs that are most often classified as ''fat.'' Although corporations will not give specific numbers, they deny this. ''It is absolutely true that American companies are slimming down and cutting costs,'' said Ford Slater, manager of special issues, planning and communications for the General Electric Company. G.E., he says, reduced its overall payroll by 100,000 people - 25 percent of its work force - from 1981 to 1985. Mr. Slater insists that ''while the total number of G.E. managers and professionals has declined, the percentage of minorities and women in those categories has stayed about the same, or even increased.'' He predicts that G.E.'s acquisition of RCA -at $6.28 billion, the largest non-oil merger in history - will not have a disproportionate effect on black executives, either. James C. Doyle, Met Life's vice president of employee relations, also bridles at any suggestion that the company might treat blacks more shabbily than whites. ''The line managers have taken over the routine work of E.E.O. They prepare their own affirmative action plans and do their own contact with the Government agencies checking compliance,'' he said. ''So we've been able to eliminate supervisory layers at headquarters. But we've had no change in the percentage of minorities that are managers.'' Even companies that have publicly announced plans for sizable slim-downs say that blacks need not be disproportionately alarmed. ''Our cutbacks will show no lessening of commitment to affirmative action, E.E.O. or any of these areas,'' says a spokesman for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which announced on Dec. 18 that it would cut 27,400 jobs. BUT black leaders and academics seem unconvinced by corporate protestations. Though few cite instances of blatant discrimination, or even of a ''last in, first out'' approach to firing black executives, they say that for the past 20 years, educated, articulate blacks have been steered into jobs in which they deal primarily with minority issues. And they say that the Reagan Administration's lack of emphasis on monitoring compliance with the E.E.O.C.'s antidiscrimination rules, has enabled companies to cut those jobs with little fear of repercussions. ''Some corporations are still somewhat dedicated to helping minorities, but there is no push from the Government compared to what it once was,'' said Ernest A. Richardson, a 61-year-old black consultant who two years ago left a 20-year career with the St. Regis Corporation after he and Champion International, the company that took over St. Regis, reached what he calls a ''happy understanding'' that the affirmative action programs that he ran would be pushed down to the branches. Mr. Richardson was not fired, and he says his consulting company is doing quite well. Still, in one way he is typical of black executives who are paying a high price for career decisions that, they say, white-dominated corporations strongly urged them to make years ago. Mr. Richardson's degree is in accounting. It was at St. Regis's suggestion that he switched his career to minority relations. That story is repeated again and again among black professionals, says Mr. Vaughn of the Urban Affairs Council. ''Throughout the 1970's, black people, even those with engineering degrees, were lured into managing affirmative action programs and the like,'' he says. ''They were told this was a way to get a foot in the door, they can switch over later. But the fact is, there is no mobility of blacks in corporate America today.'' For a time, blacks had reason to believe that these jobs represented their best shots at the top. ''In most companies, the first black to get a vice presidential position was within the human resources sector,'' said Ronald Anderson, director of minority relations at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. ''So many blacks felt this was a place where you could really rocket off. They didn't realize it had become a black managerial ghetto, that these jobs, with their great salaries, would hurt their careers down the road.'' Other blacks readily gave up line jobs to take an active role in E.E.O. James Nixon, whose job as director of ITT's equal opportunity operations ended with the New Year, started off as a nuclear engineer with another company, G.E. In the mid-1960's, G.E. asked him to be part of a nationwide effort to study its E.E.O. programs. ''I recommended that they have a headquarters organization for this, and they agreed,'' the 53-year-old executive recalled. ''So I became the head of E.E.O.'' G.E., Mr. Nixon says, made no attempt to stereotype him. In fact, in 1973 he moved out of E.E.O. and became a sales manager for G.E. in Detroit. But he, too, wound up back in E.E.O. work, when ITT, the giant telecommunications conglomerate, lured him away from G.E. with offers of high status and big bucks. ''ITT decided to upgrade its E.E.O. effort,'' he said. ''They made me an offer I couldn't refuse.'' Since then, Mr. Nixon has seen his E.E.O. department at ITT reduced from 18 people to 6 and now, to none. But much of that interim reduction, he says, was a result of increased automation and productivity on his staff's part. In any event, he is philosophical rather than bitter about how his career turned out. ''My attitude is, I play the game and I play it well, and when the game is over I look for another game,'' he says. ''The saying is, 'When white America gets a cold, blacks get pneumonia.' But we fought our way into this managerial group. What makes us think we're immune to its problems?'' But Mr. Nixon's attitude is not a typical one within the black community, or among black managers at ITT. Harold Anderson, who is now in his mid-40's, was with ITT for 15 years, most recently as manager of public affairs. A few months ago, when he realized he was likely to lose his job, he left the company to join the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem at a considerable cut in salary. ''I was about to become the only male head of household to be cut in my department,'' Mr. Anderson said. Was this because he is black? ''I don't want to think that about ITT, but I have a suspicion. For a while, Federal statutes for E.E.O. kept minorities a pretty protected class at ITT, but with the Reagan Administration's de-emphasis of E.E.O., ITT no longer saw fit to make this a special group to protect.'' ITT calls that supposition ridiculous. ''If it was Harold's perception that any group was treated as a special group to protect, he is wrong,'' said James P. Gallagher, director of public relations, who headed the department Mr. Anderson worked for. ''We had a percentage by which we had to reduce head count. I told Harold that his responsibilities would no longer be handled by this department. I've recently had to tell four or five white people the same thing.'' Those fired blacks who are still pounding the pavements are finding it hard to give corporate America the benefit of the doubt. They are particularly angry about what they see as unfair stereotyping of their skills. ''God forbid you say you had anything to do with women or minorities, you're told that's passe,'' said Ms. Clark of CBS, who has an M.B.A. in human resources. ''When you say that's not your entire background, they don't want to hear it. If you're black they think you can't do anything but affirmative action.'' Mr. Burgess of Met Life, who also has a master's degree in human resources and development and is an elected member of the Yonkers City Council, has similar complaints. ''We E.E.O. professionals are recruiters, consultants, and career counselors, and we know corporate chemistry maybe better than anyone else in the company,'' he said. ''But these skills are not considered transferable in the case of blacks. They look at us and say, 'You're just an E.E.O. person.' '' THE answer for a growing number of middle-aged corporate blacks is to start their own companies. Mr. Nixon's employment contract still has a few years to run, so he could stay with ITT if he wished. He doesn't wish - instead, he is taking a lump sum and starting a consulting/ venture capital company aimed at helping other blacks start their own businesses. ''I've been preaching for 11 years that blacks have to get into entrepreneurship,'' he said. ''So I'm going to help them do it.'' Many younger blacks still have their sights set on the corporate world. But they are far less likely, experts say, to try to rise through the personnel or public affairs route. ''Blacks coming out of business schools have recognized that this is a trap and are saying they want nuts-and-bolts experience,'' said Mr. Anderson of the University of Chicago. Some companies say they would welcome an infusion of minority talent into their technical ranks. ''We are terribly concerned about the future source of brilliant engineers and scientists, and we recognize that one of the great untapped pools is women and minorities,'' said Mr. Slater of G.E., who adds that his company awards scholarships to promising minority students and subsidizes the salaries of black engineering and science teachers. Black executives themselves also express some well-tempered optimism. ''The good news is that blacks are being recruited into mainline positions, but the bad news is that it is very slow,'' says Mr. Anderson. Added Mr. Richardson, the former St. Regis manager: ''There will never be a return to what affirmative action and E.E.O. once was, but if you have it and you really believe in yourself, you're going to make it - if not to chairman of the board, into upper management.'' Academics say the prognosis may be even better than that. ''If you think of equity and efficiency as major concerns in corporations, and you think of a pendulum swinging between the two, you realize that what is happening now is that the pendulum is swinging toward efficiency,'' said George Milkovich, a professor of human resources at Cornell University's School of Industrial and Labor Relations. ''But the concern for equity will come back.'' If corporations do not give blacks parity, society will force them to, Mr. Milkovich adds. ''Neither labor law nor civil rights happened in a vacuum,'' he said. ''Society reacts, and politicians react to societal pressure. And nothing rivets corporate attention like the threat of a $40 million lawsuit or fine.''  BLACK FUNDRAISERS GO BACK TO SQUARE ONE Ask Sullivan Robinson, head of Associated Black Charities, what fund raising is like these days, and her frustration almost overwhelms the questioner. ''This February, we're introducing a Black History Makers award, and I need corporate underwriting,'' she says. ''I went to call my old mainstays. What happened? I learned that Richard Neblett, who was in charge of corporate contributions at Exxon, had been fast-tracked to retirement. The black man who had handled contributions at Chase Manhattan was doing something else. Wesley Streeter, my main contact at RCA, is gone.'' The downsizing of headquarters staffs and the wholesale elimination of entire job categories typically filled by blacks have had repercussions far beyond the world of black executives. Directors of charitable organizations and social service programs aimed at the black community are finding that some of their best fund-raising contacts are no longer on the scene. The result, they say, is that when corporations re-evaluate their charitable contributions, black charities often do not make it past the first cut. ''In the late 60's and early 70's, corporations were really helpful in terms of funding to social services agencies,'' said John N. Odom, director of Black Agency Executives, an association of black directors of social service agencies in New York City. ''But now, organizations like ballet groups and art museums are doing better than they have in the past, while social services, particularly for minorities, are doing worse.'' Black charities have been among numerous sufferers in the tightening of charitable purse strings in corporations. ITT, for example, has eliminated a program for funding athletics for black youths. In fact, Harold Anderson, who had been liaison for that and similar programs, has been let go. But the company insists that his continued presence would have made little difference. The reason: ITT's much-publicized telecommunications joint venture with France has meant that revenues flowing directly to the corporation will be appreciably cut. ''We've always made contributions as a percentage of sales, and we're eliminating about $6 billion in sales through the joint venture,'' said James P. Gallagher, director of public relations. ''So we've cut back on contributions programs across the board, black and white.'' Similarly, General Electric executives insist that the merger with RCA, and resulting staff cutbacks, will not have a disproportionate impact on black charities. ''I would expect that the grand total of charitable contributions for RCA plus G.E. would be down somewhat next year from 1986, but minority-related contributions might actually go up as a percent,'' said Ford Slater, G.E.'s manager of special issues, planning and communications. But even if the overall flow of corporate dollars to the black community remains sizable, it will represent cold comfort to individual fund raisers. Most have spent countless hours maintaining contacts with specific individuals in large corporations so that, when those companies choose from the myriad causes needing financial support, their names are likely to be high on the list. ''I now have to find new liaisons, establish new rapports,'' says Ms. Robinson. ''And that takes years.''
