694|1987\01\04|Technology Gets More Complex|THREE years ago, when Joseph Newman set out to market an automated building system so sophisticated that it would turn off lights, turn up the heat or turn on the air-conditioning based on the commands of something called ''an occupancy sensor,'' he found few takers.|THREE years ago, when Joseph Newman set out to market an automated building system so sophisticated that it would turn off lights, turn up the heat or turn on the air-conditioning based on the commands of something called ''an occupancy sensor,'' he found few takers. THREE years ago, when Joseph Newman set out to market an automated building system so sophisticated that it would turn off lights, turn up the heat or turn on the air-conditioning based on the commands of something called ''an occupancy sensor,'' he found few takers. ''We couldn't give it away,'' said Mr. Newman, who is president of the Tishman Research Company. When he talked up the large potential for saving energy and streamlining building management, he ran into the inevitable question: What's wrong with a light switch? ''What's wrong is that nobody turns the lights out when they leave,'' Mr. Newman said. But the lean years of peddling Infracon, as his company's sensors are called, are gone for now and Mr. Newman says more than 100,000 systems have been sold since 1983. Mr. Newman, whose company has its headquarters in New York City, also acknowledges that what passes for a ''smart'' building today could be obsolete in a few years. This point was highlighted by a recent Energy Expo in Seattle, where the latest in building technologies were unveiled in a contest financed by the Federal Government to encourage high-tech, energy-efficient buildings. ''These buildings are the laboratories themselves, models for the rest of the nation,'' said Sarah Lee, a spokesman for the Energy Edge, which sponsored the contest and gave winners large cash grants. Some of the judges' favorites include a maritime center that uses icy Puget Sound water as a source for heating and cooling the building, a 62-story skyscraper sheathed with ''smart windows'' that regulate the amount of sunlight they admit, and an office building with ''parabolic'' lighting fixtures designed to focus light better than flat systems. Very soon, Mr. Newman said, a system will be available to monitor internal air quality, purge bad air and replace it with fresh air as needed. Already, there are systems that heat and cool, not by the dictates of a thermostat, but from sensors that react to the number of people in a room or the amount of daylight. To keep up with the innovations, Mr. Newman and others started the Intelligent Building Institute in Washington to dispel what they perceive as the confusion over what is or is not a ''smart'' - or ''intelligent,'' as Mr. Newman prefers - building. ''What's happened in the last few years is that buildings have become more complex and can do more things, so there has been more confusion,'' he said. And it could get worse. ''In the not-too-distant future,'' Mr. Newman said, ''you're going to see a sea of sensors.'' Just around the corner from the basic smoke detectors and sprinkler heads, he said, are ''diagnostic sensors'' for heat, light, security and air quality. In Portland, Ore., Ronald W. Huegli has designed a wall system so airtight and insulated that it all but eliminates any variations in the environment. He spent eight years developing his Mono-lite prefabricated walls, which provide an insulating value of R-50 in a single panel less than five inches thick. To achieve that sort of enclosure in standard construction would require a wall more than a foot thick and packed with insulation, most experts say. But who needs R-50 when even the strictest building codes call for somewhere around R-32? ''We found,'' Mr. Huegli said, ''that no matter what the temperature outside, it you have such high insulation value it costs very little to maintain the temperature inside.'' Originally, he used his system to grow vegetables inside his ''growth chambers,'' as he called the super-insulated gardens in a box that he manufactured. His wall panels, composed mostly of silica, which is used in making glass, were redesigned to have more structural strength. Other ideas came from the designs of spacecraft and jet fighter planes, which depend on lightweight, composite material. ''WHAT we've done is taken some of the aerospace technology and brought it down to everyday use,'' said Mr. Huegli, a 43-year-old mechanical engineer. His proposal to build a 90,000-square-foot corporate headquarters with floors and walls made of Mono-lite was convincing enough to the Energy Edge project, which provided a grant, and several investors, who provided $6 million. Groundbreaking is set for the spring. Another Energy Edge winner, 21-story Bellevue Place east of Seattle, will use heating and cooling based on an ice-maker. During the night, a pair of 200-ton chillers produce ice for daytime cooling. The rejected heat from the chiller is then recyled during the morning warmup period. This ''smart'' system, first designed on a computer model, is so efficient that the engineers were able to get rid of a whole floor of machinery, providing added rentable space for the developer. Most of the new building technologies are wired into a central nervous sytem, a computer that controls all the functions through a network of optical fibers. In Seattle's 76-story Columbia Center, for example, the building's ''brain'' can tell at any time if someone entered his office and how long he stayed, even if he just stopped in for a minute over the weekend. What this does, says Martin Selig, the center's owner, is eliminate the old excuse of ''I'm working late at the office.'' A pioneer in automated buildings is CityPlace, a 38-story office tower erected four years ago in Hartford. At the time, it was touted as the world's first fully computerized building. ''They called this a building with a brain,'' said Larry Guilmette, building manager of CityPlace. ''But it's a building with many brains.'' Most of the time, those brains do their job. But despite its body-heat sensors, customized computers for every third floor, fiber-optic ''data highway'' in the building's spine and talking elevators, Mr. Guilmette acknowledged that there was ''a rough period'' when everything did not run as smooth as planned. But the cerebral structure has settled down and, he said proudly, ''we have never had to use the manual overide.''  FOCUS: SMART BUILDINGS
