695|1987\01\04|WANT TO SWIM, OR MAYBE SHOP? TRY A SKI RESORT|THE first snow of the winter is on the ground and the wind is howling outside as the staff of the Bolton Valley ski area gathers for a meeting. The talk is of Bolton Valley's new gourmet restaurant, of improvements to the health club, of the finishing touches on the just-completed 65-unit hotel/condominium, of the child care center schedule, of its four new boutiques.|THE first snow of the winter is on the ground and the wind is howling outside as the staff of the Bolton Valley ski area gathers for a meeting. The talk is of Bolton Valley's new gourmet restaurant, of improvements to the health club, of the finishing touches on the just-completed 65-unit hotel/condominium, of the child care center schedule, of its four new boutiques. THE first snow of the winter is on the ground and the wind is howling outside as the staff of the Bolton Valley ski area gathers for a meeting. The talk is of Bolton Valley's new gourmet restaurant, of improvements to the health club, of the finishing touches on the just-completed 65-unit hotel/condominium, of the child care center schedule, of its four new boutiques. The talk, it seems, is of everything but skiing. Ralph DesLauriers, Bolton Valley's president, looking casual but dapper in a tie and sweater, slacks and hiking boots, explained later in his office. ''Anyone who thinks he is just in the business of getting people up and down mountains,'' he said, ''will find himself out of business real fast.'' On the surface, it is a worrywart type of comment. Unlike their counterparts in California, where the snow has been sparse, Eastern ski areas are gearing up for a heady year. Attendance at pre-season ski shows has been high, and the 20 members of the Vermont Ski Areas Association report a steady flow of inquiries and reservations. Resorts in Maine and New Hampshire are enjoying similar good news. But Mr. DesLauriers's caution is realistic. Of the 882 ski areas in existence nationwide in 1979, there are 650 today, according to the National Ski Areas Association. The ones that have closed are victims of poor planning, mismanagement and increased competition, says Robert Fernald, a financial specialist with Sno-engineering of Lyme, N.H., a consultant to the ski industry. To make matters worse, airline deregulation and the resulting bargain air fares have meant that ''we're competing with a beach in Acapulco or a trip to the Caribbean,'' says Scott Van Pelt, director of marketing at Okemo Mountain Ski Area in Ludlow, Vt. ''It's frightening to think about, but no one has to ski.'' Ski area operators across the country have responded to this realization with an increase in amenities to please skiers and non-skiers of all ages. They have put in tanning salons, indoor tennis courts and swimming pools, ice rinks, sleigh rides and child care. They have set up special events ranging from wine tastings to business seminars. The result, industry experts say, is that nowadays most ski resorts derive only 60 percent of their revenues from lift tickets, lessons and equipment rentals. About 12 percent comes from real estate, 11 percent from food and beverages, 4 percent from sales of equiment and clothing, and 13 percent from miscellaneous services. Ski resorts have been aggressively marketing their new offerings. A recent magazine advertisement for the Killington Ski Area, in Sherburne, Vt., the largest ski area in the East, shows a pile of recreational equipment -camera, tennis racquet, jogging shoes, ice skates, bathing suit and sunglasses - above the words ''A lot of people who vacation at Killington also bring skis.'' AMERICANS adopted skiing in a big way in 1960, when the Winter Olympics, held that year at Squaw Valley, Calif., included alpine skiing for the first time. At first all ski areas benefited from the new fad. But it was not long before skiers tired of unpredictable and sometimes meager snowfalls in the East, and went West to such resorts as Colorado's Vail, Steamboat Springs, and Keystone, and California's Mammoth. Several seasons of poor snow during the 1970's made the East even less attractive. Western resorts frantically built new ski areas, and expanded old ones with expensive condominiums. Their Eastern counterparts, meanwhile, expanded at a snail's pace. Throughout that decade, the West saw average annual growth rates in skier-days of about 9 percent while the East was making do with growth rates of 3 percent. Now it looks like the tables are turning. Technological breakthroughs in snow making mean that Eastern resorts can offer skiers a steady supply of snow under almost all conditions - something that Western resorts, which have not built up snow-making capacity, cannot do. The West reported an ''underwhelming'' season in 1985-86, with a drop of 4.3 percent in skier-days in the Rocky Mountains and of 13.7 percent in the Far West, says Charles Goeld ner, associate dean of the College of Business at the University of Colorado in Boulder, who does an annual economic analysis for the National Ski Areas Association. The Northeast, however, showed an increase of about 16 percent in skier-days. The result is a ''large reservoir of unsold condominiums'' in Utah and Colorado, says Jim Branch, president of Sno-engineering, and a profit drain at some western ski areas. Eastern ski operators, meanwhile, are congratulating themselves for investing in snow making equipment and taking a cautious approach to growth. ''I think it might have something to do with Yankee frugalness,'' says Kathe Dillman, marketing and communications director for the National Ski Areas Association, Springfield, Mass. ''As they do things in New England, they don't overextend. They proceed at a healthy economic pace.'' Bolton Valley's pace is typical for the East. Mr. DesLauriers, a Vermont farmboy turned entrepreneur, opened it on Ricker Mountain, about 20 miles east of Burlington, in 1966. Four years later, he began building slope-side condominiums. Four years after that he added a cross-country skiing center. Then came the health club. In the last two years, Mr. DesLauriers, now 51 years old, has spent $5 million on a restaurant, shops, seven new trails, a high-tech four-person lift, 10,000 additional feet of pipeline for making snow, and a 65-unit hotel/condominium. NONE of the Eastern ski areas, Killington included, is taking future health for granted. They are trying to lure new skiers to the slopes, concentrating not just on the traditional pool of 17-to-25 year olds but on professional women, families and the elderly. Gone from their ads and brochures are the ''snow bunnies,'' svelte young women in high-fashion outfits. In their place are smiling groups of thirty-ish women, families with bundled-up tots and silver-haired skiers holding hands. The New England resorts are not only trying to get them up to the slopes, but also want them to stay longer. Killington, whose 17 ski lifts make it the east's largest ski area, is marketing a variety of week-long packages. It is sponsoring a Dale Carnegie course that begins each morning on the slopes and ends each afternoon in the classroom. There is an investment seminar for those who want to mix tax shelters with schussing, several ''Champagne Ski Weeks'' co-sponsored by Paul Masson wines, a race week, winter carnivals and a Canadian-American ski week. Each special package has its own itinerary, with activities like dances, cocktail parties, films, fireworks and celebrity appearances. Many of the events have corporate co-sponsors. The packages have paid off. Killington, one of the few publicly-held ski areas in the East, just finished its 27th consecutive profitable year. Killington and its sister slope, Mount Snow, had combined net income of $3.5 million on revenues of $56 million in 1985. Ski areas often need every penny they make simply to meet the skyrocketing costs of operation. Liability insurance costs have soared, as they have in all industries. Mr. DesLauriers says Bolton Valley's liability insurance premiums last year leapt from $30,000 to $100,000 - more than all claims paid out since the area opened, he says. This year, his premium cost is $200,000. The high cost of liability insurance has raised the cost of lift tickets enormously, and has caused some smaller areas to close. The ski industry is lobbying for state laws that would, among other things, put a cap on non-economic damages such as pain and suffering and eliminate punitive damages. Environmental rules also make expansion costly. Mr. DesLauriers says that obtaining permits delayed his current expansion project a year, and added about $300,000 in consulting and engineering fees to its cost. And skiers simply demand more from their resorts than they once did. Gone are the days, says Mr. DesLauriers, when skiers were ''mountaineering types, happy with a bunkhouse and a good spaghetti dinner.'' The high-tech ski lifts and snow-making equipment, the up-scale restaurants, health clubs and other amenities do not come cheap. Industry experts say that ski areas that have not diversified could well find themselves snapped up by others. Those that diversified only into real estate may be particularly vulnerable, as the new tax law makes condominiums less attractive to investors. Indeed, Killington, which gets only 2 percent of total revenues from real estate, ''is looking forward to tremendous acquisition potential'' among competitors reeling in red ink, says David Dillon, director of corporate relations for S-K-I Limited, Killington's parent company. A shakeout may not only be inevitable, but may be beneficial. ''With the maturing process comes a purging,'' said Mr. Branch. ''It hurts, but the industry will be stronger for it.''
