696|1987\01\04|The Grade B Script for 'Iran: The Movie'|CONGRESS is in recess. For the most part, that's good news, since the sight of Congress in action makes a lot of people queasy. Unfortunately, like swallows, or cockroaches, our lawmakers are likely to return. And when they do, they will apply themselves with fierce determination (but with a studied lack of enthusiasm) to the sticky business of untangling the financial details of the|CONGRESS is in recess. For the most part, that's good news, since the sight of Congress in action makes a lot of people queasy. Unfortunately, like swallows, or cockroaches, our lawmakers are likely to return. And when they do, they will apply themselves with fierce determination (but with a studied lack of enthusiasm) to the sticky business of untangling the financial details of the CONGRESS is in recess. For the most part, that's good news, since the sight of Congress in action makes a lot of people queasy. Unfortunately, like swallows, or cockroaches, our lawmakers are likely to return. And when they do, they will apply themselves with fierce determination (but with a studied lack of enthusiasm) to the sticky business of untangling the financial details of the Iran-contra arms dealings. The first thing the Congressional committees will discover is that everyone involved lost money. We all know that Iran was gouged mercilessly, and that the Pentagon conveniently sold the weapons out of its stockpiles at wholesale 1976 prices. But the bad luck didn't stop there. Adnan Khashoggi, the billionaire Saudi arms merchant who, it turns out, has the same cash-flow problem as my Uncle Morris, lost a lot of money on the deal. The shadowy Canadians forfeited a small fortune. The Israelis did not make a penny.  In this age of avarice, why are so many people suddenly so quick to admit that they were fleeced? We are no longer accustomed to such protestations, and hearing them is, well, spooky. Could this mean that the truth is much worse than we ever imagined? Perhaps this is not, after all, your standard American-Iranian-Israeli-Saudi-Swiss-Nicaraguan-Can-adian-Panamanian cabal. As we try to plumb the depths of this fiscal implausibility, let's assume for clarity's sake that everyone involved in the money trail is lying. Surely, that does not require too great a leap of faith. Then let's approach the mystery not as Congressmen or business people, moralists or dentists, but as investment bankers with emphatically warped sensibilities. Only from this perspective can we possibly understand how the money got from point A to point Z, and why there was so little left at the end of the trip. First of all, no one ever really believed that the $30 million went straight from Switzerland to Nicaragua. That is not how the world of finance works nowadays. We live in the age of the mortgage-backed zero-coupon interest-rate swap. Even the most legitimate transaction is so complicated that it seems illegal. Besides, our Swiss friends are neither stupid nor magnanimous. Before sending the money on its historic journey, they skimmed 5 percent ($1.5 million) off the top, their standard fee for facilitating global corruption. The money was then sent to the Bahamas, where it was deposited in the account of one of America's finest young financiers, Dennis B. Clean. Because our Government had made an accounting error and was no longer sure if the original $30 million was actually $30 million or just $10 million (small numbers always being a problem for this Administration), it was decided that however much there actually was had to be given to Mr. Clean so he could increase it. Otherwise the Government might look bad. So Mr. Clean traded and the funds multiplied to $45 million. After charging the Government $8 million for his troubles (the typical investment banking fee for any minor service) and swiping another $3 million just because it felt so good, Mr. Clean sent the remaining $34 million to be laundered at a bank in Boston, where it was turned into quarters. AT THAT point, three trucks containing $12 million in change vanished from the face of the earth, an event the bank dismissed as ''a clerical error.'' The only clue investigators found was a Panamanian company called Fenway Resources, which, in a move some considered suspicious, was dissolved 12 seconds after it was created. Since the Government considered it foolish to allow so much cash to sit around idly without contributing to the restructuring and disemboweling of corporate America, the loot was transported to the Beverly Hills office of DBL Deal Inc., the prominent investment banking company. DBL then issued some junk bonds for Sir James Goldfleece and Ronald O. Imperilem, which worked out fine, until the two men decided to acquire one another. After they agreed that the only honorable way out of the mess was to have Mr. Imperilem pay greenmail to Mr. Goldfleece - and vice versa - the two raiders shook hands and decided to go after C. Pone Shuckems, the defender of shareholder rights and other lost causes, who was thought to be distracted by his recent acquisition of Guatemala. Through the magic of the junk-bond market, DBL Deal had turned the $22 million into $31 million. The company then deducted $13 million, $8 million for the normal investment banking fee, plus $5 million for meals, thus reducing the stake to $18 million. DBL Deal sent the booty on to a favorite arbitrager Bela Luboesky, but then the malcontents at the S.E.C. intervened. A crisis of confidence soon loomed. To make sure the securities markets remained calm, the S.E.C. granted Mr. Luboesky certain concessions and sent him a boxed set of TOW antitank missiles, conditioned upon his promise not to sell the weapons to Iraq or Dennis B. Clean. If Mr. Luboesky wanted to join the contras, of course, arrangements could be made. DBL Deal, meanwhile, won Federal Reserve approval to market a new financial instrument, mortgage-backed subpoenas. With the markets temporarily in turmoil, DBL, the S.E.C. and Mr. Luboesky had no choice but to turn the $18 million over to the C.I.A., which deducted the standard fee and gave the remaining $10 million to Sam Hill, a highly regarded investment banker of fortune, to take to the contras. The contra leaders responded by expressing their gratitude and vowing to use the money only for legitimate risk arbitrage. ''We'll make a killing,'' they said. The two Administration officials who allegedly hatched this whole scheme, Vice Adm. John Perplexter and Lieut. Col. Oliver Fifth, are now said by Wall Street sources to be seeking investors for a new securities firm. The contra leaders, clearly men of their time, used bank financing to leverage the $10 million into what he called ''real money.'' He then lost it all on the Gillette deal. Privately, a Reagan Administration official said that the entire affair was an embarrassment, and noted that the nation's return on equity was particularly unsatisfactory. ''I guess,'' he said, ''we learned what a lot of American companies already know - that working with Wall Street can be a very expensive proposition. But when you come right down to it, we, like investment bankers, just love to do deals.''  BUSINESS FORUM: A WALL STREET CONNECTION
