697|1987\01\04|PROSPECTS|Loans Lend a Hand|Loans Lend a Hand Loans Lend a Hand ''The basic business loan picture is improving,'' says Lacy H. Hunt, chief economist for CM&M Group in Philadelphia, and that alone is something to cheer about as the new year begins. For most of 1986, large banks held about $250 billion in short-term commercial and industrial loans, a level that reflected a weak economy. Now, says Mr. Hunt, these loans are approaching the $265 billion level. The rising loan level is good news. When demand for short-term funds rises, it means companies are borrowing money to pay dividends, meet payroll requirements and purchase equipment. ''It is an indicator of business activity and business confidence,'' says Mr. Hunt. And at least two other factors support the encouraging loan picture. ''There are signs that industrial activity is beginning to pick up, such as the rise in manufacturing employment,'' said Mr. Hunt. And inventory investment, which has undergone a dramatic liquidation since 1984, is also rising. Inventory-building is not only a sign of business confidence, it also spurs more borrowing, he says. ''Typically, increases in inventory investment lead to higher credit demands.'' Foreigners Phone Toll-Free About 400 companies worldwide offer toll-free calls for customers. ''And the number has been rising by about 20 percent a month,'' said Robert K. Baulch, manager of international marketing for A.T.&T., which sells the global service to about 120 American companies. Right now, phone companies in 15 countries offer international toll-free calling to customers in those nations. By the end of 1987, 10 more countries in Asia, Europe and South America will join that list. But, at $1.60 a call, reaching new customers around the world is not an inexpensive proposition for American companies, even though, according to Mr. Baulch, toll-free service can increase a customer's willingness to call sevenfold. The key industries involved - catalogue, travel and services businesses -will also have to make some changes in the way they do business, he says. Companies, for example, will have to set up operations to receive calls at all hours of the day - in a dozen languages. Shipping From a Tiny Isle Because of new laws and favorable taxation - no corporate tax, no estate duty, no capital gains tax and a mere 20 percent personal income tax - the Isle of Man, off the coast of England in the Irish Sea, is competing with the Netherlands, West Germany and the United States to become a major world shipping center. The isle now has 40 ships registered. But it is not stopping there. ''In the next 12 months there will probably be 100 ships on the registry,'' predicts Capt. Geoffrey Davis, chief marine surveyor for the isle.  So far, the Isle of Man has been luring shipping companies from elsewhere in Britain. That's because crews cost 30 percent less to hire on the isle and office expenses are 50 percent lower there. But because registration fees on the isle are also low, shipping companies from other countries may start to set up headquarters on the tiny island. Captain Davis says, however, that unlike Liberia and Panama, the Isle of Man is ''not a flag-of-convenience registry.'' Shipping safety-and-health standards will be high, he says, and rigorously enforced. False Teeth That Fit An estimated 30 million Americans have no teeth in one or both jaws, and about 10 percent of them cannot wear dentures for either physical or psychological reasons, says Craig Rodriguez, vice president of Nobelpharma USA, an American subsidiary of Swedish Nobel Industries. Now, he says, some of these people may have something to smile about: a 20-year-old Swedish technique called the Biotes process. The technique, which has the approval of the Food and Drug Administration and the provisional blessing of the American Dental Association, has now been tested on 9,000 Americans. The process uses three screws. The first is surgically screwed into the jawbone. It is made of titanium, and thus integrates with the bone to form ''an irreversible bond,'' said Mr. Rodriguez. A second is screwed on top of the first so that it comes up to the gum line. A third holds the tooth in place. This tooth can be used as an anchor to hold a bridge or a complete denture. The final screw can be removed if the tooth or denture needs to be replaced. The cost of an upper or lower denture created with this process is about $8,000, but, says Mr. Rodriquez, ''it may last 20 years or more.''
