698|1987\01\04|nobody Is Safe if a Smoker Is Around|MORE than 20 years ago, an advisory committee to the United States Surgeon General undertook a historic examination of the existing scientific data on tobacco use. The conclusion of this, and every Surgeon General's report that followed, was that smoking is a health hazard of enormous proportions.|MORE than 20 years ago, an advisory committee to the United States Surgeon General undertook a historic examination of the existing scientific data on tobacco use. The conclusion of this, and every Surgeon General's report that followed, was that smoking is a health hazard of enormous proportions. MORE than 20 years ago, an advisory committee to the United States Surgeon General undertook a historic examination of the existing scientific data on tobacco use. The conclusion of this, and every Surgeon General's report that followed, was that smoking is a health hazard of enormous proportions. In the years since the original Surgeon General's report on smoking and health, each major conclusion has been confirmed by subsequent independent research. The disastrous consequences to the smoker in terms of cancer, heart disease and emphysema are now beyond doubt. Cigarette smoking is the single most preventable cause of illness and death in the United States. Despite its addictive nature, cigarette smoking has been called a ''chosen risk,'' and more than 30 million Americans have quit smoking in the last 20 years, deciding that such a risk is unacceptable. On the other hand, roughly 53 million Americans continue to smoke, despite overwhelming evidence about its dangers. Today, the personal risk of illness and death from tobacco use must be viewed within the larger context of a moral issue that looms before this nation and the world. Cigarette smoking can no longer be viewed as a personal decision. We now know that smokers impose their ''chosen risk'' on millions of others who must involuntarily inhale the toxic components of burning cigarettes. Stated quite simply: You need not smoke cigarettes to be harmed by them. We have reached a critical point in the history of the social phemomenon of smoking tobacco. Two new reports, each examining the health risk of involuntary smoking, should contribute to a change in public policy perhaps as far-reaching as the changes in private behavior caused by the first Surgeon General's report. LAST November, the National Academy of Sciences issued the result of a year-long examination of the scientific evidence on the health effects of involuntary smoking. One month later, the most recent report of the Surgeon General reviewed in depth the consequences of involuntary tobacco exposure. These independent reports reached a number of similar conclusions that include these: * Involuntary smoking is a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in non-smokers. The Surgeon General's report concluded that ''it is certain'' that a substantial portion of the lung cancers that occur in non-smokers are due to exposure to tobacco smoke. Given the size of the population involuntarily exposed to smoke, a significant number of us are at risk. Indeed, the Surgeon General, C. Everett Koop, has estimated that involuntary smoking causes more deaths than all other airborne pollutants combined, with the single exception of asbestos. One recent study by the Environmental Protection Agency estimated that from 500 to 5,000 non-smokers in America die each year from lung cancer caused by others' cigarettes. * Infants and children exposed to tobacco smoke in the home have an increased incidence of serious respiratory illnesses. Asthma is more common among youngsters whose parents smoke. Children breathing the cigarette smoke of their parents have several times the usual number of respiratory infections, including bronchitis and pneumonia. * Healthy non-smokers exposed to tobacco smoke experience acute physical reactions, including eye, nose and throat irritation. We know that much of the American population is allergic to cigarette smoke. The symptoms reported by non-smokers include burning, itching and tearing eyes, headaches, sore throats and hoarseness and other allergic reactions. * The simple separation of smokers and non-smokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Non-smokers are quite likely to have no choice about breathing tobacco smoke. This takes on new importance because we know that the non-smoker can be exposed to several thousand chemical constituents in sidestream smoke, more than four dozen of which are known to cause cancer. In my opinion, the scientific evidence gained thus far about involuntary smoking is substantial and great cause for alarm. Smoking can no longer be excused as a ''chosen risk,'' but now must be viewed as one person's choice and another's unwanted danger. The evidence is now sufficient to declare that a smoker's rights end at the tip of the non-smokers nose. As the Surgeon General concluded, ''the right of smokers to smoke ends where their behavior affects the health and well-being of others.'' Protecting the public from the dangers of passive smoking requires urgent action. The only certain way to make indoor air safe from cigarettes is to eliminate the source. BUSINESS FORUM: ATTACK ON 'PASSIVE' SMOKING
