699|1987\01\04|A Propaganda War Against Cigarettes|WHAT clear and convincing proof is there that cigarette smoke in the air poses a health risk to non-smokers?|WHAT clear and convincing proof is there that cigarette smoke in the air poses a health risk to non-smokers? WHAT clear and convincing proof is there that cigarette smoke in the air poses a health risk to non-smokers? Item: A non-smoking employee in a typical New York City office would have to work nonstop for almost 24 days - more than 550 uninterrupted hours - to be exposed to the nicotine ''equivalent'' of one cigarette. It would take a marathon eating session of more than 17 - or more than 400 continuous hours at a table - to be exposed to the nicotine ''equivalent'' of a cigarette at a typical New York City restaurant. These scientific findings were based on actual test results from 47 office sites and 48 dining establishments. Item: Since 1981, ACVA Atlantic Inc., a Fairfax, Va., company that analyzes indoor air quality, has investigated 125 cases of ''sick building syndrome,'' where office air was suspected of harming the health of employees. Of these cases, only five, or 4 percent, were linked even in part to cigarette smoke in the air, which is known to scientists as environmental tobacco smoke. In another study of 203 buildings suspected of sick-building syndrome, the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration found that only four buildings (2 percent) had indoor air quality problems attributable to cigarette smoke. Both investigations noted, however, that tobacco smoke - the only indoor factor visible to the naked eye - was suspected as the culprit by occupants of most of the buildings. Item: Three major international scientific conferences, involving more than 50 eminent scientists, have concluded within the past five years that there is no persuasive evidence that environmental tobacco smoke poses a significant health risk to non-smokers. Even Surgeon General C. Everett Koop admitted in December that more than half of the 16 studies exploring environmental tobacco smoke and lung cancer in non-smokers have found no consistent, statistically significant relationship. Dr. Koop, who acknowledges he would like to see cigarettes banned, is the point man in the anti-smoking lobby's efforts to achieve a ''smoke-free society by the year 2000.'' Dr. Koop has said that the only way this goal will be reached is through piecemeal prohibition - primarily a crazy-quilt patchwork of legislated restrictions and bans in individual cities, counties and states. And Dr. Koop is taking no chances in seeing to it that the anti-smoking laws get on the books. To do so, this nation's primary health officer has abused his position, placing his political agenda above scientific integrity. No previous Surgeon General has exploited his office in such a blatantly propagandistic manner. A comparable example might have been if Carrie Nation, in the years before Prohibition, served as Surgeon General and issued a ''scientific'' report providing the political ammunition to secure passage of the 18th Amendment and the Volstead Act. THE recently released Surgeon General's report on so-called ''involuntary smoking'' is at odds on key points with a study released in November by the National Academy of Sciences. While the academy's panel expressed concern about the possible effect of smoking in the home, it acknowledged that available scientific evidence does not show that smoking on the job or in public places, such as restaurants, jeopardizes the health of non-smokers. But the academy's findings do nothing to advance the Surgeon General's political agenda, since laws are not going to be passed restricting smoking in the home, backyards and private automobiles. Not surprisingly, therefore, when the Surgeon General reviewed precisely the same body of evidence, he came away with the opposite conclusion: Smoking on the job and in public places does jeopardize the health of non-smokers. Dr. Koop apparently realized that without this conclusion, no laws would be passed to further his quest for a smoke-free society. The Surgeon General is not alone in subverting science to politics when it comes to environmental tobacco smoke. It is no exaggeration to say that these efforts to alarm non-smokers and force the hand of lawmakers have brought scientific integrity to a crossroads. The pressure from forces dedicated to the prohibition of cigarette smoking is intense. Thus, it will be no small feat for scientists and health experts to discuss the issue with complete objectivity. Recent episodes illustrate the kinds of pressure being exerted. One involved a medical education conference at a major university medical center on the health effects of tobacco smoke on non-smokers, funded in part by tobacco companies It was canceled after sustained pressure from anti-smoking activists and organizations, including the United States Office on Smoking and Health, which is headed by Dr. Koop. Following a barrage of calls and letters, several scientists withdrew from the conference at the last moment, forcing cancellation of the session. Another recent incident of intimidation involved a professor at a major state university who dared suggest that harm to non-smokers from environmental tobacco smoke has not been proved. His university was threatened by the state's health commissioner with loss of research funding. It is telling, indeed, that anti-smokers must resort to these extremes to disguise the fact that proof of harm to non-smokers from passive smoking remains as wispy as cigarette smoke itself. BUSINESS FORUM: ATTACK ON 'PASSIVE' SMOKING
