700|1987\01\04|Exlpaining the Allure of the Clones|IN continuing my overview of PC clones, to which the last two columns have been devoted, I would like to remind readers that while these computers have all made their mark by virtue of the relatively low price tags they carry, each one has something a little different to offer the buyer. Therefore, choosing a clone becomes almost as much a matter of preference in, say, keyboards, video display or physical specifications as in the pocketbook.|IN continuing my overview of PC clones, to which the last two columns have been devoted, I would like to remind readers that while these computers have all made their mark by virtue of the relatively low price tags they carry, each one has something a little different to offer the buyer. Therefore, choosing a clone becomes almost as much a matter of preference in, say, keyboards, video display or physical specifications as in the pocketbook. IN continuing my overview of PC clones, to which the last two columns have been devoted, I would like to remind readers that while these computers have all made their mark by virtue of the relatively low price tags they carry, each one has something a little different to offer the buyer. Therefore, choosing a clone becomes almost as much a matter of preference in, say, keyboards, video display or physical specifications as in the pocketbook. The Hewlett-Packard Vectra 45 ($4,874 with a 20-megabyte hard disk from Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, Calif. 94303, (415) 857-1500), discussed last week as probably the most solidly engineered of the clones, is also notable for offering the benefit - or, to some individuals, the drawback - of PAM. The acronym stands for Personal Applications Manager, a software shell shielding the user from the vagaries of MS-DOS, the computer's operating system. Instead of encountering the vacuous, and justifiably infamous, A G or C G prompt, when starting up the Vectra, one is greeted with a number of menu bars listing the applications programs stored on the hard disk -for example, WordPerfect, Lotus 1-2-3, MindMaster and so on. At the bottom of the screen appear eight light squares representing the Vectra's ''soft,'' or special function, keys designed to augment the F1 through F10 keys. These soft keys are user definable. They can be set so that the first is Start Application, say, the second is the Help key, and the rest set to perform other functions designed to aid the person running the software. To begin working with a particular program, then, the user simply moves the cursor in place over the desired menu choice and presses the first soft key. The chosen program is loaded forthwith, ready to be used. The Vectra's PAM approach can be quite useful in an office situation where, as so often happens, one employee is a computer enthusiast while the others are interested simply in getting the job done without necessarily understanding how the machine goes about its tasks. PAM can be configured to each individual's specific applications needs by the maven, and the separate users need not worry about what went into the tailoring. The usual caution with regard to clones holds: Make sure the software you want to use runs on the machine. But that caveat heeded, the Vectra is well worth looking at for many reasons, one of the most notable, albeit not mentioned till last, being the quality of its monitor. Lacking in resolution - as are, in my opinion, all personal computer monitors - it nonetheless offers one of the crispest and clearest color displays of any personal computer on the market. Although personal computer sales picked up in 1986 from their former doldrums, there are still a lot of companies whose destiny prognosticators equate with that of the old Studebaker. That ill-fated vehicle had a lot going for it, but not enough to enable it to survive the changing fortunes of Detroit and the consolidation of the auto companies. The survival factor is a question in many personal computer buyers' minds, and rightfully so. But it is also a factor somewhat less important in the choice of a clone than in the selection of other electronic equipment. The fact is that within the variously designed consoles resides a fairly standard and mutually substitutable assortment of components. So interchangeable are these parts that many savings-conscious purchasers will acquire a bare-bones clone and add to it the particular graphics card, disk drive or hard disk they prefer - sometimes at a cost lower than the manufacturer of the clone would have charged for his own version of the components. THE ''I can replace it wholesale if I need to'' mentality currently coming into vogue in the computer marketplace may be particularly important to have if one is considering the purchase of a Tandon PCA ($3,725 with a 40-megabyte hard disk from the Tandon Corporation, Chatsworth, Calif., 91311, (800) 556-1234). Where the otherwise exotic-sounding Hewlett-Packard and Epson are well known among personal computer aficionados, Tandon is less than a household name even among this select group of established users. Most people have heard of Tandon, if they have heard of it at all, through news of the company's financial woes or through having seen its stock drop from a high of 35 to a tenth of that price. Yet Tandon remains one of the largest manufacturers of those key computer components, disk drives, many of which can be found in the I.B.M. PC itself. Tandon's personal computers, only recently introduced in the United States, have already become some of the best-selling machines in Europe where they have been available for a little more than a year. With that in mind, and considering that a company cognizant of its problems may well have a better chance of survival than its less informed competitors when the inevitable debacle befalls the doppelgangers in 1987, a closer look at the Tandon PCA, one of the least expensive of the AT clones available, is well worth the time spent on it by any prospective personal computer purchaser. The PCA is nearly identical to the I.B.M. PC-AT, but it offers in addition a dual 6- and 8-megahertz speed - one toggles back and forth between the two modes by pressing the Control, Alt and slash keys simultaneously -to allow users to run their software at higher speeds wherever that is possible. The keyboard looks the same as that of the original AT, but it does not have quite as good a feel. It does, however, lack the clickety-clack of the original. So far does the PCA go in copying its I.B.M. mentor that it comes complete with obscure and excruciating manuals just as the original does. They are really no worse than the industry standard, but given the fact that many buyers of the clones are first-timers stepping into the world of electronic data processing because plunging prices have made that move irresistible, the instructional arena seems an unfortunate place for computer companies to cut corners. To its credit, on the other hand, Tandon has included a menu-driven program to help users in formatting its hard disk - certainly a step in the right direction. If the Tandon PCA differs very little from I.B.M.'s AT except in its label and console, its price is dramatically lower. What's more, that price will no doubt be discounted even further by aggressive dealers. And price is the main reason why buyers are looking at clones in the first place. THE EXECUTIVE COMPUTER
