701|1987\01\04|Social Security Takes a Bigger Tax Bite|WHILE the Reagan Administration remains hotly divided on the merits of expanding the Medicare system to cover more of the costs of catastrophic illnesses, the new year is ushering in a host of less dramatic changes to the Social Security system - most of them designed to bring in additional revenues.|WHILE the Reagan Administration remains hotly divided on the merits of expanding the Medicare system to cover more of the costs of catastrophic illnesses, the new year is ushering in a host of less dramatic changes to the Social Security system - most of them designed to bring in additional revenues. WHILE the Reagan Administration remains hotly divided on the merits of expanding the Medicare system to cover more of the costs of catastrophic illnesses, the new year is ushering in a host of less dramatic changes to the Social Security system - most of them designed to bring in additional revenues. ''The system is in better shape than it's been in a long time,'' said William J. Arnone, a benefits consultant in the Los Angeles office of Buck Consultants Inc., an employee benefits consulting firm. ''The temptation is to fiddle around with it, and to cut scheduled payroll tax increases prematurely. I think that would be a real mistake.'' No legislation is pending, but in recent months a number of politicians of both parties, including such Presidential hopefuls as Pierre S. du Pont 4th, the former Republican Governor of Delaware, and Representative Jack Kemp, Republican of New York, have urged various reforms to reduce the burden of the payroll tax. For 1987, the wage base, or amount of income on which the FICA (for Federal Insurance Contributions Act) tax is imposed, will rise to $43,800 from $42,000. The tax rate will remain at last year's level: 7.15 percent for employees, equally matched by employers, and 12.3 percent for self-employed individuals. The maximum FICA tax that an employee will pay in 1987 will be $3,131.70, up from $3,003 in 1986. The self-employed will pay a maximum of $5,387.40, compared to $5,166 last year. In 1988, the FICA tax rate for employees is scheduled to rise to 7.51 percent, equally matched by employers, on a projected wage base of $45,300. For the self-employed, the rate will go to 13.02 percent on the same projected wage base. In 1990, the rate for employees will rise to 7.65 percent, on a projected wage base of $50,100. The rate for the self-employed will soar to 15.3 percent on the same base, although a new system of deductions will make the burden less onerous. The scheduled increases are part of a long history of increasing both the tax rate and the wage base. Two decades ago, in 1966, the wage ceiling was $6,600; the employee rate was 4.2 percent and the self-employed rate was 6.15 percent. In the past 10 years, there have been six increases in the FICA tax rate. Although income tax rates have dropped dramatically during that time, the concurrent rise in FICA tax has meant that disposable income for many individuals has not increased at all. ''We've achieved an undesirable parity between income tax and Social Security tax,'' says Avery E. Neumark, an employee benefits consultant with the accounting firm of Ernst & Whinney. On the other side of the ledger, benefits to retirees and others will inch up by 1.3 percent starting with the checks they receive in January. This modest cost-of-living increase, reflecting the 12-month change in the Consumer Price Index, will mean, for example, that retired workers on average will see their monthly checks go to $488 from $482; workers who retired at age 65 last year and qualified for the top benefit of $760 will see their checks go to $769. THE change that will affect the most people, however, is that retirees will have to pay a higher portion of their medical costs. Under changes in Part A of Medicare, which covers hospital costs, the deductible for in-patient hospital expenses, the portion of those expenses paid for by the patients themselves, will rise to $520 from $492. In addition, the amount of daily co-insurance, or the amount of daily expenses that patients must pay, will go to $130 from $123 for the 61st to 90th days of hospitalization, and to $65 from $61.50 for the 21st to 100th days of post-hospital care in a skilled-nursing facility. The major change in Part B of Medicare, which provides optional insurance that covers doctors' bills and surgeons' fees, is an increase in the monthly premium. The charge for the coverage will rise to $17.90 from $15.50, lifting the annual cost of the protection to $214.80, from $186 last year. Even greater changes in Part B were proposed last month by Dr. Otis R. Bowen, Secretary of Health and Human Services. He suggested expanding Medicare to cover catastrophic medical expenses, but President Reagan's top economic adviser, Beryl W. Sprinkel, opposed the idea, maintaining that the plan would replace a competitive private market with a Government monopoly. The President may make recommendations in his State of the Union message this month. In any event, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Massachusetts Democrat and long a supporter of national health insurance, praised Dr. Bowen's plan and said he would introduce a version in Congress. Regardless of how the debate over the merits of expanding Medicare is resolved, some observers have doubts about the adequacy of the Medicare portion of the FICA tax to fund the medical costs of the existing program beyond the next few years. ''Various projections have been made that indicate Medicare may prove to be insufficient by 1990,'' says Thomas H. Paine, partner in the New York office of Hewitt Associates, an employee benefits consulting firm. ''I think it's very likely.'' The current 7.15 FICA payroll tax has two components, he notes: 5.7 percent is for Old Age Survivors and Disability Insurance, while 1.45 percent is for Medicare. ''We're talking about another half a percentage point to fix it,'' he says. ''But so far Congress hasn't felt it was needed.''  TAX HELP FOR THE INJURED The efforts of a New York City teacher who was injured while he tried to protect his students from an intruder wielding an iron pipe did not go unrewarded by the Internal Revenue Service. The teacher suffered severe back and leg injuries in the attack. After an examination for the New York Board of Education, physicians gave the teacher a certification permitting him to receive his normal salary under Board of Education regulations. While sickness and accident benefits are generally taxable to an employee if they are paid by the employer, compensation received under a workers' compensation act is generally exempt. The question was whether the salary the teacher received after being injured was subject to tax. The Research Institute of America, a tax publishing service, reports that the I.R.S. recently held that the teacher's salary was tax-exempt because the Board of Education regulations were tantamount to a workers' compensation act. The decision came as a private letter ruling, which applies only to this particular case. Nonetheless, such rulings are widely followed as an indication of the current I.R.S. position on an issue. PERSONAL FINANCE
