704|1987\01\04|A Yearlong Look at Government's Underside|ONE year ago this Friday, Donald R. Manes, a powerful, popular and ambitious politician, walked out of Queens Borough Hall and into that special rogues' gallery of men who have robbed New York.|ONE year ago this Friday, Donald R. Manes, a powerful, popular and ambitious politician, walked out of Queens Borough Hall and into that special rogues' gallery of men who have robbed New York. ONE year ago this Friday, Donald R. Manes, a powerful, popular and ambitious politician, walked out of Queens Borough Hall and into that special rogues' gallery of men who have robbed New York. Mr. Manes, then the borough president, left his office early on the evening of Jan. 9, got into a city car and drove into the night. Nine hours later he was found in the car near Shea Stadium, dazed and bleeding from wounds on his wrist and leg. The initial mystery was soon solved. He had tried to kill himself, and later did kill himself, after learning that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had discovered his role in a bribery ring that included other political leaders and present and former city officials. That disclosure has confronted New Yorkers with even bigger and still far from fully answered questions. How wide and how deep was the corruption? And who else was involved? Graft, of course, is nothing new. In New York City government, it goes back even before the time in 1861 when P.T. Barnum bribed the aldermen to let him pump saltwater from the bay for his whales to swim in. Whether the current scandals are the worst since Boss Tweed's exposure in the 1870's, as some have said, is still a matter of debate: Mayor Koch has sought to soften the blow to his administration by rattling off lists of previous episodes, including the time when bodies were sold from the morgue under the administration of that icon of New York mayors, Fiorello H. La Guardia. But a great deal has been learned this past year about the underside of New York's government. Here is a review of some of it.  THE 'MARKETPLACE' Since Jan. 9, 11 men have been convicted or have pleaded guilty to charges related to the scandal. A 12th, the former head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, was acquitted of governmental corruption charges but convicted of personal wrongdoing and of lying on city disclosure forms. At least nine other people have been granted immunity in exchange for their testimony. Fourteen others, including two judges and the former taxi and transportation commissioners, are under indictment and awaiting trial. The cases are not all directly related, but taken together they have provided an insider's view of what one defense attorney described as the ''municipal marketplace'' -an Oriental bazaar where politics, government and business intersect, where influence is bought and sold and where the line between a consulting fee and a bribe is not always easy to discern.  EARLY WARNINGS In retrospect, there were clues long before the scandals broke. Alex Liberman, a loyal member of the Brooklyn Democratic organization who became the man in charge of negotiating city leases, pleaded guilty in 1984 to taking more than $1 million in bribes from landlords. Questions about his integrity had been raised twice before, but each time he had simply been moved to another job. In 1982 James Rose, comptroller of the Parking Violations Bureau, complained about corruption in the bureau. He went to his superiors, to the Inspector General of the Transportation Department and to the Department of Investigation. But his information, along with the later testimony of a police officer and another parking bureau official, was shunted from file to file and ultimately forgotten. In 1984 James Smith, a Brooklyn weekly newspaper editor, asked Mayor Koch during a City Club luncheon why the city was making Stanley M. Friedman, the Bronx Democratic leader, ''a millionaire'' by awarding a contract to Citisource, a firm in which Mr. Friedman held stock. Mr. Koch brushed the question aside, challenging Mr. Smith to show evidence of a crime. In 1985 Justice William C. Brennan of Queens Supreme Court was convicted of taking bribes from organized crime figures to fix cases in Queens. Elected to the court in 1969, he had long been active in borough politics and was a close friend and frequent luncheon companion of Presiding Justice Francis X. Smith, who is now under indictment for perjury in a separate case.  THE STING The scandals came at a time when many New Yorkers, buoyed by boom times, had come to believe that their city, for all its economic and social divisions, was at least a relatively honest place. Sure, a building inspector might take a bribe, they thought, but this was not Chicago. It is thus particularly ironic that the corruption in New York came to light because a corrupt New York businessman, Bernard Sandow, tried to expand to Chicago and got caught. The man who triggered the crisis is a burly bunco racketeer and professional informer. He was born in Brooklyn 57 years ago as Michael Raymond, but his alias for the last few years has been Michael Burnett. Paroled from prison at the end of 1983, he got a job as marketing director for a New York City collection agency, Systematic Recovery Services, whose president was Mr. Sandow. Mr. Sandow wanted to use in Chicago the technique that was working so well in New York: bribing public officials. Mr. Burnett took on the job, but unbeknownst to Mr. Sandow, Mr. Burnett by then had become an informant for the F.B.I. From an apartment on Chicago's Gold Coast, Mr. Burnett began gathering evidence against corrupt Chicago officials - and against Mr. Sandow. On Nov. 26, 1985, Mr. Burnett, wearing an electronic recording device, attended a luncheon at Hisae's Restaurant, near Cooper Union in the East Village. The other guests were Mr. Sandow and Geoffrey G. Lindenauer, the portly deputy director of New York City's Parking Violations Bureau. The men talked about politics. They talked about losing weight. Most of all they talked about bribing the director of the Parking Violations Bureau, Lester N. Shafran, with cash, goods and women. At one point Mr. Sandow accompanied Mr. Lindenauer to the men's room and gave him $5,000. Confronted a month later, Mr. Sandow agreed to become an informer, too. Between them, Mr. Sandow and Mr. Burnett supplied the information to the F.B.I. that persuaded Mr. Lindenauer to turn on the other members of the bribery ring and testify for the Government.  THE RING At the heart of the scandals was the revelation that Parking Violations Bureau contracts had been bought and sold by a ring of corrupt officials. To improve the collection rate, the P.V.B. had started farming out overdue fines to private agencies - sometimes already established, sometimes created for the purpose -that were allowed to keep a cut, up to 40 percent of the millions of dollars they collected. They would also, it emerged, turn over a cut to ring members, who included: Mr. Manes, the Queens Democratic leader, who was sworn in for a fourth term as borough president two days before his first suicide attempt. The parking bureau had become known as ''a Queens operation,'' with appointees loyal not to Mayor Koch but to Mr. Manes, who had bragged about how much money he would make in bribes if he succeeded in becoming mayor himself. On March 13 Mr. Manes died after driving a knife into his heart. He was never charged with a crime, but was named a co-racketeer in indictments issued after his death. Mr. Friedman, who became the Bronx Democratic leader with Mayor Koch's help after serving as Deputy Mayor and patronage chief in the administration of Abraham D. Beame. A sign that hung in Mr. Friedman's City Hall office declared, ''Crime Doesn't Pay - as Well as Politics.'' His party post allowed him to continue practicing law, and his clients included collection agencies and a company named Citisource. Citisource paid Mr. Friedman in stock, making him its largest stockholder, and the value of his holdings soared when Mr. Friedman won the company a contract to make portable computers for the P.V.B. In November he was convicted of acting as a broker for bribes to Mr. Manes and other officials to win their help in obtaining contracts for Citisource and other firms including Datacom, a collection agency and computer service company. Michael J. Lazar, a former City Councilman, chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission and Transportation Administrator, the man who initiated the use of private collection agencies at the parking bureau under Mr. Beame. After leaving city government he became a private real estate developer and also worked for Datacom. He was convicted of paying bribes on behalf of Datacom. Mr. Shafran, a protege of Mr. Lazar who became director of the P.V.B. soon after Mr. Koch became Mayor in 1978. Mr. Shafran was convicted of taking bribes from contractors. Marvin B. Kaplan, chairman of Citisource, who was convicted of arranging a bribe of Citisource stock that Mr. Friedman held on behalf of Mr. Manes and Mr. Lindenauer. Mr. Lindenauer, the deputy director of the P.V.B. and a longtime friend of Mr. Manes, who got him his job. Mr. Lindenauer pleaded guilty to collecting some $400,000 in bribes from contractors and splitting the money with Mr. Manes. He also said he lied to other city officials so that Citisource would be given the contract to produce portable computers. His testimony in Federal Court was crucial to the conviction in November of Messrs. Friedman, Lazar, Shafran and Kaplan. Mr. Lindenauer's sentencing has been postponed while he continues to cooperate with Government lawyers.  CLOSE LINKS Not part of the ring, but tied either to Mr. Manes or to the parking bureau and currently under indictment: Richard L. Rubin, a longtime associate of Mr. Manes who was the secretary to the Queens Democratic organization. He was indicted for inducing two Queens Assemblymen to put secretaries working for his law firm on their payrolls. Anthony R. Ameruso, a Beame administration official, promoted to Transportation Commissioner by Mayor Koch in 1978 on the recommendation of Brooklyn political leaders but over the objections of the Mayor's own screening committee. Mr. Ameruso has not been charged in relation to the bribery ring, although the parking bureau was under his supervision. But he resigned as commissioner and has been charged with perjury for concealing an investment related to a firm to which he awarded a ferry permit. John A. Zaccaro, a real estate and insurance broker and the husband of former Representative Geraldine Ferraro. He was indicted for acting ''in concert'' with Mr. Manes in attempting to extort money from a company seeking a franchise to install cable television. Also indicted were Justice Smith, who is accused of lying about meetings he attended with Mr. Zaccaro, and Michael Nussbaum, a political aide to Mr. Manes, indicted for soliciting a bribe from a cable company on Mr. Manes's behalf.  OTHER CASES Indicted as a result of separate investigations: Jay L. Turoff, who was named chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission on the next to last day of the Beame administration on the recommendation of the Brooklyn Democratic organization and was later reappointed by Mayor Koch. He resigned abruptly in March, in the midst of investigations that are still continuing, and was indicted in June for accepting a $30,000 bribe from the manufacturer of a taxi meter that the commission ordered drivers to buy. Mr. Turoff arranged unsecured financing for the meter company, Electronic Compumeter, through a politically connected Brooklyn credit union, Hyfin (an acronym for Help Your Friend in Need). Three friends of Mr. Turoff who helped organize Compumeter have been indicted with him and will go on trial next month. A Brooklyn Supreme Court Justice, Jerome Cohen, has been charged with accepting interest-free loans from Hyfin in exchange for children's trust fund accounts. Hyfin's secretary-treasurer, Edmund Lee, and two other executives have pleaded guilty to fraud charges and the credit union has been dissolved. John J. McLaughlin, who resigned as president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation while under investigation in August 1985. He was indicted later that year for stealing from an elderly heiress whose funds had been placed in his trust. Last April, after the start of the city scandals but before his trial, he was charged with using the trust fund to launder a bribe from a company doing business with the hospitals corporation. He was acquitted on that charge but convicted of falsely billing travel expenses to the trust fund and lying on city disclosure forms. He was sentenced to six months in prison.  YET TO COME Federal and local prosecutors say their work is far from over. In the Bronx: The United States Attorney in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani, is cooperating with the Bronx District Attorney, Mario Merola, in an inquiry into allegations of political abuse. Included are reports that Bronx businessmen were pressured for contributions to the campaign fund of Stanley Simon, the Bronx borough president, in exchange for economic development aid. Also under investigation are consulting fees paid to Mr. Friedman and some of his political associates by Cablevision, the firm that holds the cable television franchise in the Bronx. And the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, has joined Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Merola in an investigation of Wedtech, a Bronx defense contractor that may have defrauded the Government. In Brooklyn: The Brooklyn District Attorney, Elizabeth Holtzman, is investigating the award of cable television franchises and allegations that millions of dollars in bribes have been paid to Board of Education building inspectors to approve shoddy work. Federal Government officials are looking at the activities of the retired leader of the Brooklyn political organization, Meade H. Esposito, and are investigating a charge that Carl A. Capasso, a construction contractor who is close to several ranking members of the Koch administration, paid kickbacks to obtain a contract to build a sewage treatment plant. THE REGION
