706|1987\01\04|Questions About Casey's Condition Go Unanswered|William J. Casey is in stable condition, fully conscious and ''sitting up periodically,'' Georgetown University Hospital reiterated last week. But doubts about his condition persisted, and many questions remained unanswered. The hospital had given the same brief condition report several days after Mr.|William J. Casey is in stable condition, fully conscious and ''sitting up periodically,'' Georgetown University Hospital reiterated last week. But doubts about his condition persisted, and many questions remained unanswered. The hospital had given the same brief condition report several days after Mr. William J. Casey is in stable condition, fully conscious and ''sitting up periodically,'' Georgetown University Hospital reiterated last week. But doubts about his condition persisted, and many questions remained unanswered. The hospital had given the same brief condition report several days after Mr. Casey underwent surgery for removal of a brain tumor Dec. 18. The lack of specifics, and apparently of any improvement in the condition of the 73-year-old Director of Central Intelligence, prompted speculation that he was not recovering well and might be unable to walk or speak. President Reagan has not talked to Mr. Casey, a close and trusted adviser, since the operation, according to the White House spokesman, Larry Speakes. Mr. Speakes said he did not feel ''it was appropriate at this stage'' to explain why. (Mr. Reagan himself was was scheduled to enter Bethesda Naval Hospital today for a routine follow-up check for colon cancer and for prostate surgery. ''What I'm going in for is kind of a breeze,'' he said.) Last week in Palm Springs, Calif., where the Reagans were taking a New Year's holiday, Mr. Speakes also told reporters Nancy Reagan had ''called Mrs. Casey to wish her a happy New Year and ask about her husband's situation and so forth.'' Under a barrage of questions, he said repeatedly that he did not know what Sophia Casey had replied. Mr. Speakes denied reports that the White House had drawn up a list of possible successors in case the Director was unable to return to work. Mr. Casey's ability to recover will depend on several factors that were not disclosed by the hospital, such as his condition before the operation, the precise location of the lymphoma and the areas of the brain that surgeons had to cut to reach it. The tumor could have damaged Mr. Casey's intellectual capacities in the last few months, or even years, but he may also have escaped any impairment. In any case, he must still undergo radiation treatment and possibly chemotherapy, making his return unlikely for some time. Mr. Casey suffered seizures that led to discovery of the tumor just hours before he was to testify before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, which was investigating the secret Reagan Administration program to sell arms to Iran and to use profits from the sale to benefit Nicaraguan rebels. Mr. Casey had said previously that the intelligence agency acted as a ''facilitator'' for the arms sales but that he had not known where the money was going. THE NATION
