708|1987\01\04|Koch Seems Little Damaged, Except for Loss of Innocence|DURING one of his periodic radio call-in shows, after the corruption scandals that have bruised his third term had already stretched out for months, Mayor Koch asked the question that had been his trademark in better times. ''How'm I doin'?'' he asked a caller named Pat. ''I think you could do a lot better,'' she said.|DURING one of his periodic radio call-in shows, after the corruption scandals that have bruised his third term had already stretched out for months, Mayor Koch asked the question that had been his trademark in better times. ''How'm I doin'?'' he asked a caller named Pat. ''I think you could do a lot better,'' she said. DURING one of his periodic radio call-in shows, after the corruption scandals that have bruised his third term had already stretched out for months, Mayor Koch asked the question that had been his trademark in better times. ''How'm I doin'?'' he asked a caller named Pat. ''I think you could do a lot better,'' she said. ''You're not the old Mayor Koch that I love.'' He could have stopped there. Most politicians would have. Not Ed Koch. ''But you still like me, right?'' Pause. ''What's not to like?'' came the answer. ''But. . . .'' The Mayor, laughing, interrupted. ''I'm gonna quit while I'm ahead.'' Click. The incident demonstrated, as have so many others in the last 12 months, that 1986 was the year Ed Koch lost his political innocence. It was a year in which the Mayor, seemingly invulnerable after his 78 percent re-election victory just the year before, found himself conceding error, apologizing, explaining, fighting off the lame-duck label by talking about running for a fourth term in 1989. In a particularly damaging admission, the 62-year-old Mr. Koch confessed to poor judgment and naivete in dealing with the city's political leaders. He has had to accept policies he once opposed, to adopt procedures he once criticized, to concede that he is a less accomplished manager than he predicted in his 1977 campaign slogan, ''After eight years of charisma and four years of the clubhouse, why not try competence?'' No allegations of corruption have touched Mr. Koch's inner circle, but more than 20 top officials have left over the year, some because of the scandals and some not. The government has been slowed; the Mayor has, he acknowledges, lost some ground. But at City Hall, where trying to assess Mr. Koch's status is an abiding obsession, he is given high marks for resilience. Few are willing to count him out. ''Oh he's been damaged,'' said Brooklyn Borough President Howard Golden. ''But not enough to make it interesting.'' ''Koch didn't get elected because he's a good manager,'' said Edward N. Costikyan, the lawyer who wrote ''Behind Closed Doors,'' a handbook of city politics. ''He didn't get elected because he's particularly well organized. He's an ebullient person, and in this era people don't decide about politicians on the basis of fact, they decide on the basis of image and personality. He keeps doing what he always did. That's the key.'' Doing what he has always done, the Mayor has, since January, made international headlines by telling a group of visiting Soviet youngsters that their government is ''the pits''; complained at a news conference right after the Fourth of July celebration that he had been ignored; and gone out of town repeatedly, even as the scandals were at their height, to promote his second book, ''Politics.'' And it was toward the end of the year of the scandals that Mr. Koch went out to a church in Howard Beach to confront angry white residents who accused him of smearing their community after a black man was killed there in a racial attack. All were classic Koch moves. What has become increasingly evident is that his political survival will turn on whether the public still wants basically the same man they have been electing and re-electing since 1977. Board of Education President Robert F. Wagner Jr., a friend, put it this way: ''Is he more cautious and less trusting now? Yes. Has he changed fundamentally? No.'' It has always been one of Mr. Koch's weaknesses that he embraces people who say they like him. It is unclear whether that has changed, but very clear that it must. He befriended political leaders later implicated in the scandals, sending a message of acceptability that might have made corruption in his government easier. Close to Party Leaders Mr. Koch has repeatedly insisted that he allowed himself to get close to the kind of party leader he once fought because he needed help to get Federal loan guarantees early in his first term and felt that he had to dispel the notion that he was a maverick, unable to forge a coalition. But others have argued that the Mayor was motivated by self-interest. They point out that the former maverick ultimately got the support of nearly all the regular Democratic leaders in his campaigns. If he runs for a fourth term, he may well have to re-establish his image by running against the Democratic bosses, as former Mayor Robert F. Wagner did when he campaigned successfully for his third term in 1961. The more immediate problem for Mr. Koch and the city is whether the scandals, which have taken on a tenacious life of their own, will impede the Mayor's ability to govern. So far the impact, beyond slowing things down, has been difficult to measure. It seems at times that the Mayor has lost some clout, that he cannot cajole officials the way he used to. He has deferred or withdrawn some issues within the purview of the Board of Estimate because they were controversial or did not have unanimous support. He has accepted compromises from City Council leaders that he might have avoided a year ago. At the same time, the Mayor has some of what he calls ''heavy lifts'' under way, such as installing water meters in residential buildings. And there is no evidence at all that either the public or the leaders of the powerful financial community have lost confidence in him. ''If the scandal dominates the second year of his third term, then I think he's going to have big problems,'' said City Council President Andrew J. Stein, a potential candidate for Mr. Koch's job. ''If it becomes peripheral and he can make substantive improvements in services, I think he can look strong. It's a big question mark. I don't think anybody, including the Mayor, knows the answer.''  THE REGION
