709|1987\01\04|Are College Loans Leaving Students In Too Much Debt?|When Congress started the Guaranteed Student Loan program in 1965, it considered it a convenience for middle-class families ineligible for other aid. It has since become a hallowed institution and, for many, a way of life.|When Congress started the Guaranteed Student Loan program in 1965, it considered it a convenience for middle-class families ineligible for other aid. It has since become a hallowed institution and, for many, a way of life. When Congress started the Guaranteed Student Loan program in 1965, it considered it a convenience for middle-class families ineligible for other aid. It has since become a hallowed institution and, for many, a way of life. With rising college costs and fewer grants, students owed $9.8 billion last year under various Federal programs, almost triple the figure of a decade ago. During the same period, Federal grants and scholarships declined by 62 percent. The Government says Guaranteed Student Loans now cost it $2 billion a year in interest subsidies and $1 billion in defaults. These developments have stirred fears that the nation is creating a generation of overburdened debtors. According to a report released last week by Congress's Joint Economic Committee, a third to a half of all undergraduates leave college owing an average of more than $6,800. Students at graduate and professional schools often accumulate debts of five figures. Some critics worry that borrowers will be forced to postpone marriage, children, mortgages and further education, or shun low-paying professions like social work. Others are concerned that the specter of spending 10 years paying for college is discouraging minority enrollment. While the report found little evidence of serious repercussions, it advised more study and raised the possibility of overhauling the system. Meanwhile, the Administration announced that it would seek to expand a pilot program that eliminates subsidized interest rates but provides more flexible repayment terms. IDEAS & TRENDS
