710|1987\01\04|FOR MENTALLY ILL, LIFE ON STREETS IS NO BOOM|THE population of state and county mental hospitals has plunged 79 percent in the three decades since advocates of community care began demanding that patients be released from big institutional ''warehouses.''|THE population of state and county mental hospitals has plunged 79 percent in the three decades since advocates of community care began demanding that patients be released from big institutional ''warehouses.'' THE population of state and county mental hospitals has plunged 79 percent in the three decades since advocates of community care began demanding that patients be released from big institutional ''warehouses.'' That is a major reason why there is much more psychotic behavior evident on America's streets than there used to be, according to some psychiatrists. But recently the campaign to treat patients in the community has been meeting resistance. In some states, the trend has slowed or even stopped. Several states, such as Washington, have changed their laws to make it easier for authorities to commit the mentally ill for involuntary treatment. Some mental health professionals, such as Dr. J. Frank James, the Oklahoma Commissioner of Mental Health, worry that there will be a swing back toward institutional care. Public pressure for such a change has increased amid reports that at least one-third of the nation's homeless have psychological problems. The movement to empty state hospitals grew from a coalition of community mental health advocates, civil libertarians and fiscal conservatives, said Joseph P. Morrissey, who supervises research for the New York State Office of Mental Health. Supporters believed that it was better to treat the mentally ill in the community where they were closer to their families and jobs. New drugs that eliminated such flagrant symptoms as hallucinations allowed patients to live more easily outside hospitals. There were also financial incentives. Federal programs, including Medicare and Medicaid, helped pay for community care. As a result of these factors, the census of state and county mental patients fell from a peak of 558,922 in 1955 to 116,136 in 1984, the last year for which figures are available from the National Institute of Mental Health. But adequate community facilities did not exist and were usually not developed. Former mental patients ended up in nursing homes, alleys and emergency rooms of public hospitals. ''The chronic mentally ill patient had his locus of living and care transferred from a single lousy institution to multiple wretched ones,'' said Dr. John A. Talbott, a past president of the American Psychiatric Association and now editor of its journal Hospital and Community Psychiatry. ''The lawyers and other civil libertarians are not on the offensive any more,'' he said. ''There seems to be much more concern about individual and group safety rather than freedom at any cost.'' Families of the mentally ill have joined the debate, complaining that outside the hospital their relatives sometimes resist necessary care. Ashton C. Dunham of Pittsburgh, who has a mentally ill son and has been a prominent advocate for the disabled, said that too often families must ''stand by helplessly and watch a loved one slowly degenerate.'' While the number of people in state mental hospitals has declined, annual admissions have risen from 178,003 in 1955 to more than 400,000 in some recent years. This suggests that patients are being admitted for shorter stays, not for the type of long-term custodial care they received in the past. While the process of reducing the population of state mental hospitals has ''virtually ceased'' in some places, elsewhere the movement goes on, said Dr. Howard H. Goldman, director of mental health policy studies at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore. Plans for New York In fact, most states continue to recognize a need to improve community services, said Dr. James of Oklahoma, president of the National Association of State Mental Health Directors.''Contrary to some claims,'' he said, a survey of state mental health officials ''found no evidence of any widespread national trend reversing the community mental health movement.'' New York State officials said recently that during the next 10 years they intend to reduce by a third the number of patients in the state's 22 adult psychiatric hospitals. At the same time, they plan to increase the number of community residences for chronic mental patients. The number of patients in New York mental hospitals has already been cut to 22,000 from 93,300 in 1955. Across the country, Dr. Goldman said, ''there appears to be a core of 75,000 resident patients for whom there is no available alternative to state hospital treatment.'' Many could be placed in the community if housing and other services were available, he said. To protect the interests of society and the mentally ill, several states have adopted laws or procedures permitting authorities to order outpatient treatment. The patient can live in the community but must undergo treatment, which may include drug therapy.This procedure, known as involuntary outpatient commitment, is being tried in several states including North Carolina, Hawaii and Arizona. Leonard S. Rubenstein, who has represented many patients as a lawyer for the Mental Health Law Project, a nonprofit firm based in Washington, says the promise of humane treatment remains unfulfilled. ''Naive expectations about transition to community care have been crushed,'' he said. ''States continue to channel their funds into large institutions, leaving chronic patients on the streets without housing, treatment or support. The answer to that problem is not to take away people's rights, but to provide for their needs in the community.''
