712|1987\01\04|RIGHTS MOVING UP ON SOVIET AGENDA|REBECCA KATSAP was the first off the Aeroflot flight from New York. Tears streaming down her face, she stepped onto Soviet soil for the first time in nine years, one of 50 homesick emigres who returned to Moscow last week. ''This is my motherland,'' she said.|REBECCA KATSAP was the first off the Aeroflot flight from New York. Tears streaming down her face, she stepped onto Soviet soil for the first time in nine years, one of 50 homesick emigres who returned to Moscow last week. ''This is my motherland,'' she said. REBECCA KATSAP was the first off the Aeroflot flight from New York. Tears streaming down her face, she stepped onto Soviet soil for the first time in nine years, one of 50 homesick emigres who returned to Moscow last week. ''This is my motherland,'' she said. The repatriation of the emigres, some of whom had become American citizens during their time in the United States, was the latest step in what appears to be a Soviet effort to defuse criticism about its emigration policies - both at home and abroad. Emigration from the Soviet Union and repatriation are both tightly controlled. Although the world's attention has been on the movement of people out of the Soviet Union, Moscow also makes it difficult to return, rejecting all but a few repatriation requests. Western diplomats have said that the recent changes are part of a growing willingness to address human rights concerns, including the treatment of dissidents. The most dramatic evidence of this was the return to Moscow last month of Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist who was banished to the city of Gorky for nearly seven years. On emigration, Western criticism has been particularly pointed in recent years as the flow of Jews, Armenians, ethnic Germans and others has fallen to fewer than a few thousand a year, compared with a peak of about 50,000 in 1979. The Government is tackling the emigration matters with a combination of open and oblique moves that some diplomats believe are designed to pave the way for a modest increase in emigration in 1987 while reducing the allure the West holds for many Russians. One step was the enactment of a new emigration law, which went into effect New Year's Day. Advertised as a move toward a more humane system, it simplifies and codifies a confusing array of regulations. Officials said that applications for exit visas will be reviewed within a month of submission in an effort to end the long delays associated with such cases. Soviet critics at home and abroad, including Anatoly B. Shcharansky, the political prisoner who was freed in February in an East-West exchange, have argued that the law will make emigration more difficult. Family reunification, for instance, is restricted to cases in which a close relative such as a parent, spouse, child or sibling lives in the West. Under the old system, reunification was often approved even when the relationship was more distant, such as cousins and grandparents. Although it remains to be seen how the law will be carried out, there have been promising signs that the emigration bottleneck may ease in some cases, particularly in those that involve divided spouses. In Washington, State Department officials, while noting that individual cases are being resolved, expressed concern that in the long run the new law may not result in significant increases in emigration. A broad increase is partly contingent on the success of private talks between the Soviet Union and Israel. Diplomats say that the indirect communication between the two countries in recent months could lead to a rise in Jewish emigration. Moscow severed diplomatic relations during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. At the same time, other steps are clearly intended to make emigration less attractive. The group that returned last week included both elderly and young people, and some Jews. There seemed no common element beyond disenchantment with life in the West, and an impression that the things were improving in the Soviet Union under Mikhail S. Gorbachev. But many said they had waited years for Moscow to approve their return. The press gave extensive coverage to the arrival of the emigres, whose message was conveyed by Valentin Agazarian, an Armenian tailor. ''I don't see a good life over there,'' he said. ''The United States has so many problems and life is hard.'' Soviet television recently broadcast an American documentary about the life of Russian emigres in the United States that made clear that the adjustment to a strange society was not easy. There were also reports that Moscow may be interested in persuading some prominent emigres, including Yuri Lyubimov, the theater director, to return from the West. Mr. Lyubimov, whose nonconformist work made him a cultural idol before he left in 1984, has said that he would consider returning only if he could have artistic freedom and no restrictions on his foreign travel, according to diplomats. In another sign of lessening hostility, the death in Paris last week of Andrei A. Tarkovsky, a film director who defected to the West in 1984, was noted by the news agency Tass in an obituary that praised his contribution to Soviet cinema. In a country where change can often be detected in seemingly minor developments, people who are seeking to move abroad were talking last week about changes at the office of visas and registration, the agency that processes emigration applications. Long regarded as the preserve of some of Moscow's most sullen bureaucrats, the agency's employees seemed suddenly transformed. ''They were unbelievably polite,'' one Muscovite said.
