713|1987\01\04|EAST EUROPEANS MOVING TO ORGANIZE DISSIDENCE|CONTACTS among political dissidents and human rights advocates across the borders of the East European countries are growing in number and intensity. Poles, Czechoslovaks, Hungarians and, to a lesser extent, East Germans and even a few Rumanians have been exchanging views and signing joint appeals.|CONTACTS among political dissidents and human rights advocates across the borders of the East European countries are growing in number and intensity. Poles, Czechoslovaks, Hungarians and, to a lesser extent, East Germans and even a few Rumanians have been exchanging views and signing joint appeals. CONTACTS among political dissidents and human rights advocates across the borders of the East European countries are growing in number and intensity. Poles, Czechoslovaks, Hungarians and, to a lesser extent, East Germans and even a few Rumanians have been exchanging views and signing joint appeals. In November, more than 100 dissidents from all five countries signed what they called the Budapest Declaration, proclaiming the 1956 Hungarian uprising as the ''common heritage and inspiration'' of all East European states. The declaration was followed by a less-publicized but equally significant brief that was submitted to the Vienna conference on European security and cooperation. This paper was signed both by East Europeans promoting human rights and representatives of West European peace and disarmament groups. The document asserted the claims of citizens of all countries to organize freely on issues ranging from peace, ecology and labor organizing to resistance to the draft. Some East European dissidents have been establishing vague, albeit not altogether satisfactory, ties with West European peace groups. Most of the East Europeans stress human rights issues, and often they are patronizing toward and merely tolerate the peace groups' disarmament strategies. Still, for the Easterners, links with groups in the West that are the targets of Soviet propaganda and persuasion tend to provide some protection from official harassment. The Budapest and Vienna efforts required considerable organizational skill, reflecting the intensifying, although still largely spontaneous, links that the dissidents have been establishing. ''There has definitely been a change,'' said Janusz Onyszkiewicz, a Polish mathematician and the former spokesman of the now-outlawed Solidarity independent union federation. ''Psychologically, there was always the will to cooperate across borders but the technical capabilities lagged behind,'' he added. Now, partly as a result of direct-dial international telephoning and the establishment of links through Western supporters, as well as the possibilities for peaceful protest demonstrated by the Poles during the Solidarity era, contacts are proliferating. Polish underground publishing houses are producing translations of works by Soviet, Hungarian and especially Czechoslovak dissidents. In Czechoslovakia, a more modest operation has printed Polish writers. And Hungarian editors of uncensored work have visited Poland to study clandestine production and distribution methods. Poles Mark Hungarian Uprising An observance in a Roman Catholic church near Warsaw of the 30th anniversary of the Hungarian revolt, and its suppression by Soviet troops, drew 500 people, far more than were able to mark the day publicly in Budapest. A book of poems about the uprising was published clandestinely in Polish and Hungarian. A tablet in both languages was dedicated, commemorating those killed or wounded in battles with Soviet tanks. At the same time, ''Largo Desolato,'' a play by Vaclaw Havel, the frequently imprisoned Czechoslovak writer and leader of the Charter 77 human rights group, is being performed in Warsaw homes by a theatrical troupe. In Budapest, directors have staged Polish plays about the cities now known as Lvov and Vilnius, which passed from Polish to Soviet control. Hungarian audiences liken the play's nostalgic references to their own yearnings for Transylvania, the province under Rumanian control, where the Hungarian language and culture and, according to many, the safety of ethnic Hungarians are threatened. Furthermore, emigre groups in the West, who have usually concentrated on their own separate concerns, are establishing closer links. The American periodical, Across Frontiers, and the London-based East-West Foundation publish the work of East European rights activists. And Kontinent, a magazine founded with West German backing by Soviet emigres, has various nationalities represented on its editorial board. Cooperation across East European frontiers ''is significant but it is moving at an uneven pace because of different levels of repression,'' Mr. Onyszkiewicz said. The Bucharest Government punishes Rumanians who are caught even speaking with foreigners. In Bulgaria, the closest Soviet ally, no significant dissident movement, apart from the oppressed Turkish minority, seems to have coalesced. Several activists cited the effort to assemble signatures for the Budapest Declaration, which said that the Budapest rebellion, the 1968 ''Prague spring'' and the Polish Solidarity era all expressed the yearnings for change. When issued, the document carried the names of 54 Hungarians, 28 Poles, 24 Czechoslovaks and 16 East Germans. In fact, while the text was being quietly circulated, some 500 Poles volunteered to sign it. There were many hurt feelings as the Polish group was winnowed down so as not to overwhelm the others. ''The Poles have the strongest opposition and they have the freest hand,'' said a Hungarian organizer. He added that perhaps the most remarkable achievement of the declaration was that three Rumanians later added their names, thus risking severe punishment. ''As Poles, we have to avoid setting the pace without considering the dangers that exist elsewhere,'' said Mr. Onyszkiewicz. ''A few years ago, some of our dissidents met with our Czechoslovak friends from Charter 77 at a border town. For our people, it meant two days of questioning. For the Czechs it meant months and even years in prison.''
