714|1987\01\04|CRITICS SAY F.D.A. IS UNSAFE IN REAGAN ERA|ALTHOUGH the Food and Drug Administration was not given its present name until 1930, its ancestors had been looking into the safety of the foods eaten, medicines taken and cosmetics applied by Americans since 1907, leading it to regard itself as the nation's oldest consumer protection agency. Now, six years into the Reagan Administration, this venerable agency provides a case history of hotly disputed application of the|ALTHOUGH the Food and Drug Administration was not given its present name until 1930, its ancestors had been looking into the safety of the foods eaten, medicines taken and cosmetics applied by Americans since 1907, leading it to regard itself as the nation's oldest consumer protection agency. Now, six years into the Reagan Administration, this venerable agency provides a case history of hotly disputed application of the ALTHOUGH the Food and Drug Administration was not given its present name until 1930, its ancestors had been looking into the safety of the foods eaten, medicines taken and cosmetics applied by Americans since 1907, leading it to regard itself as the nation's oldest consumer protection agency. Now, six years into the Reagan Administration, this venerable agency provides a case history of hotly disputed application of the Reagan philosophy of deregulation. Consumer advocates say it is clear that the protection of consumers by the Food and Drug Administration has declined in the Reagan years. The F.D.A. counters that protection has actually been improved, as tight budgets force efficiency and as industry cooperation increases. In a 1982 speech to the drug industry that is now being cited by both supporters and critics of the agency, Vice President Bush said, ''I think we've started to see this philosophical shift, the end - or the beginning of the end - of this adversarial relationship. Government shouldn't be an adversary. It should be a partner.'' Calling the speech ''prescient,'' Dr. Sidney M. Wolfe, who heads the Health Research Group, a consumer organization, said, ''We've seen a deterioration in the F.D.A.'s policing of the drug-medical device industry, and Americans are beginning to taste the fatal or health-destroying fruits of this partnership.'' John A. Norris, the Deputy Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said Mr. Bush was simply describing ''an attempt to eliminate unnecessary adversarial contact with industry.'' He said, ''We consider ourselves partners with consumers and manufacturers in providing therapies needed by the people.'' Dr. Wolfe said unnecessary deaths and injuries had been caused by the agency's desire to cooperate with industry. One example, he said, was delay in warning parents of a link between aspirin and Reye's syndrome, a rare, often fatal disease that primarily afflicts children just getting over a virus infection. The F.D.A. ordered warning labels for aspirin bottles in March, under pressure from Congress, after a Government study affirmed the link to the disease. ''In October 1981 a Federal Government advisory committee recommended against the use of aspirin for chicken pox or flu because of the increased risk of Reye's syndrome,'' Dr. Wolfe said, ''but, as a result of pressure of the aspirin industry . . . a proposal by the F.D.A. for mandatory warning labels was withdrawn in the fall of 1982. As a result, 150 American children are dead and dozens have brain damage. Most, if not all, would have been avoidable if action had been taken. Now warning labels are mandatory and the problem has practically disappeared, but it is too late for the dead and injured.'' Mr. Norris said, ''I worked on this for a year and a half with industry to support voluntary relabeling and more recently in crafting new regulations. There is no doubt at all in my mind that the voluntary effort of the industry and the regulations of the F.D.A. have been effective.'' Another official of the agency, Dr. Robert Temple, director of the office of drug research and review, said that Dr. Wolfe ''can't know whether the publicity and voluntary warnings were not more effective than a mandatory ruling.'' Other instances cited by Dr. Wolfe included an artificial heart valve and a painkiller that he said has been linked to nonfatal kidney failure. The valve, made by the Shiley division of Pfizer, was withdrawn from the market in November, but Dr. Wolfe said the F.D.A. had known of a defect in it since February 1981. ''Since then, 193 valves have fractured, with an estimated 129 fatalities,'' Dr. Wolfe contended. Mr. Norris said, ''We would love to have all the risks be zero, but in any of these procedures there are real risks. There was not a greater risk here than in other heart valves.'' The Food and Drug Administration has noted that the Shiley valves virtually eliminated a blood clotting problem prevalent in other makers' valves. Debate Over Painkiller The painkiller is suprofen, distributed by McNeil Pharmaceuticals under the brand name Suprol, which, Dr. Wolfe said, ''has been taken off the market in Britain but is still on the market in the United States, and as a result over 300 cases of acute kidney failures have occurred in Americans.'' The agency says suprofen should be used only if other painkillers are not effective. Dr. Wolfe asserted that the agency failed to remove suprofen because it was approving too many drug applications - 30 last year. Mr. Norris said that this was ''the most scurrilous of his allegations.'' The average review period for a new drug, he said, is 24 months, even though the law requires action in six months. And the approval process for suprofen took 86 months. ''It is outrageous to characterize that as a drug rush,'' Mr. Norris said. Indeed, some industry and physicians' groups attack the agency for moving too cautiously, especially on experimental drugs that have shown promise in treating such otherwise incurable illnesses as Alzheimer's disease and AIDS. Mr. Norris replies that the agency is moving as rapidly as is consistent with safety. Other consumer groups echo Dr. Wolfe. Bruce Silverglade, director of legal affairs at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, complained, for example, about a voluntary program to note the presence of sulfites on the labels of nonprescription drugs. Some people suffer a fatal allergic reaction to sulfites. ''Even if 5 or 10 percent of drug companies don't comply, it would result in acute injury and death,'' he said. ''It is not satisfactory if it is below 100 percent.'' Mr. Norris responded, ''If you want to move swiftly on something, it is best to pursue voluntary action first because mandatory actions are time-consuming.''
