716|1987\01\04|NUCLEAR ALARM STIRS HONG KONG ACTIVISM|A NUCLEAR plant under construction in China just 30 miles from Hong Kong is generating enormous heat in this crowded British territory. The project, which is not scheduled for completion until 1992, has already aroused a political typhoon and caused tension between Hong Kong and its vast neighbor to the north.|A NUCLEAR plant under construction in China just 30 miles from Hong Kong is generating enormous heat in this crowded British territory. The project, which is not scheduled for completion until 1992, has already aroused a political typhoon and caused tension between Hong Kong and its vast neighbor to the north. A NUCLEAR plant under construction in China just 30 miles from Hong Kong is generating enormous heat in this crowded British territory. The project, which is not scheduled for completion until 1992, has already aroused a political typhoon and caused tension between Hong Kong and its vast neighbor to the north. No one in Hong Kong paid much attention to China's proposal to build the nuclear plant at Daya Bay when it was first discussed early in this decade. But in the last several months, after the accident in April at the Chernobyl plant in the Soviet Union, Hong Kong residents have been distressed at the prospect of such a facility on their doorstep. Perhaps even more fundamentally, the situation raised new doubts about whether China can be trusted after it absorbs Hong Kong in 1997. If China does not heed the British colony's wishes now, some say, why should it pay attention to such concerns after the territory becomes a part of the motherland? A Chinese official in Hong Kong grimaced at that logic. ''A lot of resources already have been committed to the project,'' he said. ''China says, 'Why should we give it up because of a lot of people who don't know about nuclear power?' It's a very difficult situation for China.'' Of course, Hong Kong has been gripped by political events in the past. In the late 1960's the colony was shaken by riots sponsored by admirers of Mao Zedong, the late Chinese leader. But Daya Bay marked the first time that many Hong Kong residents had signed a petition or taken a controversial stand. The Hong Kong Government, led by a British-appointed governor, is also in an awkward position. At first it refused to release a 1984 study it commissioned to examine the Daya Bay proposal. Later the Government backed down and released part of that report. This unusual concession to public opinion hurt the antinuclear campaign; the report strongly favored the plant. ''A lot of people think if they can't get the plumbing right in Peking, how can they get nuclear power right,'' said Peter B. Harris, chairman of the political science department at Hong Kong University. Like many others, he believes that concern over the Daya Bay plant has forced Hong Kong for almost the first time to take a substantial interest in politics. Normally apathetic Hong Kong residents have rallied against the project, and 20 percent of the territory's 5.5 million residents have signed a petition objecting to it. ''The middle class woke up,'' explained Albert W.Y. Chan, a social worker and politician. Mr. Chan says that Daya Bay has for the first time created a political system based on mass participation, not small interest groups. Professor Harris agrees: ''There are signs that a political consciousness is beginning to emerge for the first time. In politics, you've taken the cork out of the bottle, and you won't be able to put it back again.'' British Engines ''Hong Kong people are quite reluctant to take a stance, especially on a political issue,'' explained the Rev. Fung Chi-Wood, a 30-year-old Anglican who is leading the campaign against the Daya Bay plant. Despite the protests and opinion polls showing that most Hong Kong residents favor a halt or delay in the construction of the plant, neither Hong Kong's Government nor Britain's seems to have done anything to dissuade China. Indeed, some Hong Kong residents charge that Britain has accepted the risk to Hong Kong because a British company will supply turbines for the $28-billion plant. Pushed into a defensive alliance, Britain, China and Hong Kong all assert that the plant will be safe, that it is sufficiently far from Hong Kong and that it will be the cheapest source of power. Southern China is desperately short of electricity, to the point that industrial growth must be curtailed, and Hong Kong is expected to face a shortage in the next decade. While 70 percent of Daya Bay's output will be sold to a Hong Kong utility, some will be left to ease the shortage in the area around Canton, China. The Daya Bay protests may not be enough to stop the nuclear plant, but they are likely to reverberate through Hong Kong's emerging political system. Proponents of direct elections to choose territorial leaders say their movement has gained support as a result of the nuclear controversy.
