718|1987\01\04|IN DEFENSE, JAPAN PUTS A TOE OVER THE 1% LINE|JAPAN put an abrupt end last week to years of public agonizing and knocked down one of its stouter pillars of military policy. Unexpectedly, the Government approved a 1987 defense allocation of $22 billion, an amount that will exceed 1 percent of the projected gross national product by four one-thousandths of a percentage point.|JAPAN put an abrupt end last week to years of public agonizing and knocked down one of its stouter pillars of military policy. Unexpectedly, the Government approved a 1987 defense allocation of $22 billion, an amount that will exceed 1 percent of the projected gross national product by four one-thousandths of a percentage point. JAPAN put an abrupt end last week to years of public agonizing and knocked down one of its stouter pillars of military policy. Unexpectedly, the Government approved a 1987 defense allocation of $22 billion, an amount that will exceed 1 percent of the projected gross national product by four one-thousandths of a percentage point. For a decade, the 1 percent level had been the outer limit of permissible military spending. So its abrogation, even by a hair-thin margin, produced a strong, if predictable, reaction. Opposition parties charged that Japan was embarking on a rapid arms buildup, while Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone countered that nothing was farther from reality. For now, the facts seem to support Mr. Nakasone. It is not the Japanese style to do anything rapidly on a matter as grave as defense. The Government, after all, flirted with the 1 percent barrier for years. Moreover, even before last week Japan had adopted a five-year military program that is supposed to total $115 billion through 1991, an expenditure that works out to 1.04 percent of projected G.N.P. for the period, hardly a galloping break from the old policy. The country's long preoccupation with a specific percentage, some defense specialists say, has obscured the more important question of how the money is spent. Gradually, avoiding divisive domestic debate, Japan has expanded its military role, acquiring new weaponry, developing technologies and aligning itself more closely with United States strategy in the Pacific. This cooperation has grown in recent years as the Japanese, worried about a surge of Soviet naval and air power across Asia, have identified Moscow as the main threat to their security. That does not mean Japan can ignore constraints on its military that go well beyond a reluctance to spend too much. The armed forces, assiduously called Self-Defense Forces, are permitted to fight only if the country is directly attacked. Under a 27-year-old treaty, the United States must come to Japan's aid in wartime, but Japan is prevented from returning the favor by a Constitution that bars it from entering into ''collective security'' arrangements. Its nuclear arms potential is crippled by a longstanding Government policy that bars such weapons from being possessed, manufactured or introduced into the country. These policies sometimes lead to anomalies. While Japan calculates that it ranks eighth in the world in defense spending, its 180,000-troop army is far smaller than that of any of its North Asian neighbors. The Japanese navy is the fifth largest in terms of tonnage, but it lacks big ships associated with naval power; it has, for example, no aircraft carriers, which are considered to be offensive in nature. Slowly, these self-imposed - some say self-conscious - limitations are eroding. A dozen years ago Japan purchased F-4 jets from the United States that lacked special fittings for in-flight refueling. With limited flying range, it was argued, the planes could not be considered offensive. Now Tokyo is acquiring F-15 fighter jets -12 are provided for in the new budget - and all carry in-flight refueling equipment. Close Ties With U.S.  More broadly, Japan has stretched its definition of self-defense beyond anything previously considered acceptable. At American urging, it has committed itself to defending sea lanes up to 1,000 nautical miles - about 1,150 miles - from its coast to ease the burden of the overextended American Seventh Fleet. The Japanese are in no position yet to make good that promise, but they say they will be ready in the 1990's. Mr. Nakasone declares Japan to be part of the Western alliance more insistently than his predecessors. His Government has shared sensitive intelligence reports with Washington. In 1983 it agreed also to provide military technology, and last September it joined the Reagan Administration's space-based missile defense program, although talks on a specific Japanese role are stalled. Joint military exercises with the United States have become routine and increasingly sophisticated, while the Government appears to have bent the prohibition against introducing nuclear arms by tacitly accepting port calls by American warships presumed to be carrying such weapons. Only 15 years ago, most of these moves would have touched off anti-Government protests. But there is no such reaction in the prevailing conservative mood. The United States, which will spend about 6.1 percent of the American gross national product on defense in fiscal year 1987, has praised the changes. The steady expansion is attacked, however, by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev. He has said that Japan wants to join the United States and South Korea in an Asian version of NATO, but defense officials here dismiss the charge as groundless. On the face of it, it seems that Japan is content to take its time about becoming a military power. Even as the Government swept aside the 1 percent limit, it began considering a new rule. A new formulation is expected soon, and a leading contender is a policy that would restrict military spending to ''about 1 percent'' of G.N.P. In a country with an appetite for both vague phraseology and slow change, that concept should find many supporters.
