719|1987\01\04|A CASE OF RACIAL VIOLENCE IS BESET BY CONTRADICITONS|IT was a ''solid case'' against the white youths, who admitted attacking the blacks, but it fell apart in court and the whites were freed.|IT was a ''solid case'' against the white youths, who admitted attacking the blacks, but it fell apart in court and the whites were freed. IT was a ''solid case'' against the white youths, who admitted attacking the blacks, but it fell apart in court and the whites were freed. The white motorist who admitted killing one of the blacks with his car said he would testify, but a black victim refused to do so. A black lawyer, without citing detailed evidence, charged an official coverup; authorities denied it and cited many details, but confusion and doubt prompted the intervention of a special state prosecutor. Such were the twists, turns and contradictions last week in the Howard Beach case: an ugly episode that touched a raw nerve in many blacks and whites and has drawn City Hall, black leaders, the police, prosecutors and various lawyers into a maelstrom of anger and mistrust after years of relative racial peace in the city. As the case staggered through a second week, it remained manifestly riddled with confusion -gaps in police accounts, contradictions among witnesses and disagreements among lawyers and authorities over even the simplest facts. The resulting deadlock all but stymied the prosecution. The facts least in dispute were these: Three blacks walking through the mostly white, middle-class Howard Beach section of Queens early Dec. 20 after their car broke down were chased and beaten by a dozen white youths wielding fists, a bat and a tree limb. One victim, Timothy Grimes, got away; another, Cedric Sandiford, was severely beaten twice. Mr. Sandiford's stepson, 23-year-old Michael Griffith, fled the attack through a hole in a fence and, on the Shore Parkway just west of Kennedy Airport, was struck and killed by the car of Dominick Blum, 24, a court officer, who drove away, returned an hour later and was not charged after he said he thought he had hit a tire or an animal. The police said Mr. Sandiford told them he also escaped through the fence and saw a car from the chase again on the highway, but did not see the fatal crash. Three white youths were seized on murder and other charges, and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward called the case ''solid.'' Then the contradictions arose. Mr. Sandiford's lawyer, Alton H. Maddox Jr., said his client had seen the crash. He charged that Mr. Blum was an accomplice of the attackers and had deliberately killed Mr. Griffith. He said Mr. Sandiford would not cooperate unless Mr. Blum was charged with murder. He also said his client was strip-searched and otherwise mistreated by officers. The police denied mistreating Mr. Sandiford and said their inquiry showed Mr. Blum had merely been driving by and hit Mr. Griffith accidentally. In Queens Criminal Court Monday, the only testimony came from police officers quoting the suspects. Police said one youth recalled saying, ''There's some niggers in the pizza parlor - let's go kill them.'' Another told of beating the blacks and of seeing Mr. Griffith flying through the air after being hit by a car. Amid cries of ''injustice,'' Judge Ernest Bianchi called the evidence insufficient and dismissed murder, manslaughter and assault charges against Jon L. Lester, 17 years old, Scott Kern, 17, and Jason Ladone, 16. Only a reckless endangerment charge was left, and the youths were freed on bail. Legal experts said Queens District Attorney John J. Santucci could still take the case to a grand jury, but without the testimony of Mr. Sandiford - the only person besides the whites who saw Mr. Griffith go through the fence - the prosecution chances were slim. Mr. Blum, the driver, said he would testify without immunity, but his account might have less bearing on the case than on his own liability for leaving the scene. Prosecutors could attempt to force Mr. Sandiford to testify, experts said, but that path might lead to a political minefield. For example, if Mr. Sandiford were to defy a legal order to testify, officials might face the uncomfortable prospect of having to jail a victim of racial violence. Law enforcement officials said Mr. Santucci might turn the case over to Federal authorities for prosecution as a civil-rights violation. Mr. Maddox said the victims would cooperate in a Federal case, but preferred that Governor Cuomo appoint a special prosecutor. On Friday, Deputy Attorney General Charles J. Hynes, the state's special prosecutor for the Criminal Justice System, agreed to look into the handling of the case by the police and the district attorney. That appeared to be unsatisfactory to Mr. Maddox, who wanted an independent prosecutor to take over the entire case. Meanwhile, a customarily contentious Mayor Koch assumed a peacemaker's role. Mr. Koch, who is sometimes accused of insensitivity toward blacks, was booed in a white church and cheered in a black church. Later he met with Howard Beach residents and joined in defending the community against allegations of racism. He also joined with 23 black leaders in decrying ''pervasive and systemic'' racism in the city. But questions persisted: Why was Mr. Blum not charged with leaving the scene? Why was his car not impounded? Did the district attorney ignore Mr. Sandiford's account? What did he see at the fence and on the highway? Was Mr. Griffith forced to run onto the highway to his death? The police said Mr. Blum was not charged because it was not clear he had done anything wrong; they said his car was not impounded because they had all the evidence they needed from it. Mr. Sandiford's account was not ignored, the district attorney said. Authorities said he did not witness Mr. Griffith's death. But if all this was so, why was Mr. Maddox withholding cooperation by Mr. Sandiford? Commissioner Ward, who is black, accused the lawyer of angling for a lucrative wrongful-death lawsuit; Mr. Maddox tearfully denied it. Others said Mr. Maddox might be trying to advance his own political agenda or to punish racism not in a courtroom but in a larger political arena. Like racism, the questions seemed to go on and on.
