72|1987\01\01|FURNITURE SALES OFF, KNOLL IS REGROUPING|HIT by a severe slump in the demand for office furniture, Knoll International, the New York-based designer and manufacturer of modern furniture for offices and homes, is undergoing a restructuring that so far has cost an estimated 200 jobs and prompted the company to buy back the stock it issued less than four years ago in its first public offering.|HIT by a severe slump in the demand for office furniture, Knoll International, the New York-based designer and manufacturer of modern furniture for offices and homes, is undergoing a restructuring that so far has cost an estimated 200 jobs and prompted the company to buy back the stock it issued less than four years ago in its first public offering. HIT by a severe slump in the demand for office furniture, Knoll International, the New York-based designer and manufacturer of modern furniture for offices and homes, is undergoing a restructuring that so far has cost an estimated 200 jobs and prompted the company to buy back the stock it issued less than four years ago in its first public offering. Once a highly specialized company that concentrated on reproducing masterpieces of modern furniture for a select group of customers, Knoll in the last decade has tried to move into the far larger market for mass-produced office systems. As recently as two years ago the office furniture business was expanding by almost 20 percent annually. Lawrence R. Ryan, then Knoll's president and chief executive officer, announced in November 1985 that the company wanted to increase its share of the mass market from about 3 percent to 10 percent. In the past year, however, an oversupply of office space and widespread uncertainty about the economic climate have resulted in a severe cutback in orders for new furniture. ''It used to be a tremendous growth market but it's plateaued,'' said Stanley Lanzet, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Big companies are very stingy in committing orders while they're uneasy about the economy. And office furniture is a highly deferrable item.'' Frederick Marcus, a member of Knoll's board as well as director of financial relations, concurred. ''There has been a real deceleration in orders from corporate America,'' he said. ''The hardest hit have been the large contracts, the new corporate headquarters.'' Mr. Marcus said Knoll's strength had always been with architects and designers. ''We were weakest at the dealer level, working with the everyday, grind-it-out pieces,'' he said. ''It's going to take us two to four years to establish a presence in the dealer community, while our competitors are well entrenched and have been doing it right for 10 to 15 years.'' Steelcase Inc. of Grand Rapids, Mich., and Herman Miller Inc. of Zeeland, Mich., together control some 50 per cent of the large-contract office furniture business. Since the early 70's Knoll has put more and more of its effort and prestige behind a series of office systems, coordinated sets of desks, chairs, filing cabinets, wall panels and shelves designed to accomodate computer hardware and its complex wiring. Mr. Marcus said the company was changing emphasis and many of the people who have left ''were not interested in working with the dealers.'' Among the casualties was Mr. Ryan. ''Larry's talents were optimized when levels of demand kept increasing,'' Mr. Marcus said, ''and his records speak for themselves. He just wasn't familiar with a low-growth environment.'' Most of the staff cuts came in October, said Joyce Clark, a company spokesman. Mel Stuart, who succeeded Mr. Ryan, was president of Knoll International WorldTrade Inc., the company's foreign subsidiary, in a period when the overseas market was a ''low-growth environment,'' Mr. Marcus said. Knoll was founded in 1938 by Hans Knoll, a German immigrant whose family had made furniture in Germany designed by the Bauhaus School. In the years after World War II Mr. Knoll and his wife, Florence, revolutionized office design by popularizing the furniture of Marcel Breuer, Mies van der Rohe and Eero Saarinen. Mr. Knoll died in 1955, and in 1977 Mrs. Knoll sold the company to General Felt Industries of Saddle Brook, N.J. In l983 Knoll raised $45 million in its first public sale of stock, and used much of the money to finance its entry into the mass-produced office systems business. One analyst described the move in 1985 as ''a Cadillac moving down to the Oldsmobile part of the business.'' It is those shares that the company is currently buying back for $12 a share. The current price is about $11.50. The stock, which is traded on the American Stock Exchange, reached a high of $20.38 in the first quarter of 1986. Mr. Marcus said there were roughly 3.23 million shares outstanding, about half of them held by institutions and half by private investors. The tentative expiration date for the buy-back offer is Jan. 15. Mr. Marcus said he expected the offer to be fully subscribed. Mr. Marcus said Knoll decided on the buy-back ''because to protect the core of our employees and the core of our business, we realized we were going to have to make a series of decisions that would have a negative near-term impact on earnings.''
