721|1987\01\04|CONTRA WAR: SHARP UPTURN FORECAST SOON|Government and military officials in Central America say they expect a sharp upturn in fighting between the Nicaraguan rebels and Sandinista forces in the first quarter of 1987. In recent interviews, American, Nicaraguan, Honduran and rebel officials all seemed to agree that fighting would step up in the coming months.|Government and military officials in Central America say they expect a sharp upturn in fighting between the Nicaraguan rebels and Sandinista forces in the first quarter of 1987. In recent interviews, American, Nicaraguan, Honduran and rebel officials all seemed to agree that fighting would step up in the coming months. Government and military officials in Central America say they expect a sharp upturn in fighting between the Nicaraguan rebels and Sandinista forces in the first quarter of 1987. In recent interviews, American, Nicaraguan, Honduran and rebel officials all seemed to agree that fighting would step up in the coming months. They gave two reasons. One is that United States military aid is now reaching the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras, which will allow them to pick up the pace of their operations. Second, these officials said, the contras believe they must score early military successes to challenge the Sandinista Government for control of Nicaragua and to justify the continuation of American aid. Congress approved $100 million in aid to the contras in October, $70 million of which was for military equipment and training. Of this aid, $30 million has already been given to them. More Money Due in February An additional $40 million is due to be released in February, unless Congress votes to cut off the aid. If that happens, President Reagan would have to veto the Congressional action to keep the money flowing. In the view of those interviewed, continued American support is critical to the contras' survival. Nicaraguan officials express confidence that their military strategy will prevent major gains by the contras regardless of American aid. In a New Year's Eve address, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said that United States assistance to the contras had ''produced nothing'' and that the rebels were ''in the process of decomposition.'' Nicaraguan strategy is designed to keep pressure on the contras along the Honduran-Nicaraguan border so they cannot infiltrate the interior of Nicaragua from their camps in Honduras. Despite the overall confidence expressed by the Sandinistas, there is speculation by some senior Sandinista officers that the contras might try to seize and hold a town in Nicaragua in the coming months. These officers say they believe the contras' goal would be to declare the surrounding area ''free Nicaragua.'' This, they said, would give Mr. Reagan a pretext to recognize the contras as the legitimate government and to come to its aid by invading Nicaragua. U.S. in Honduras Maneuvers United States military maneuvers in Honduras are viewed by the Sandinista military leadership as preparations for such an invasion. The Nicaraguan Defense Minister, Humberto Ortega Saavedra, who is the President's brother, said in a year-end review of military operations that any contra attempt to seize and hold Nicaraguan territory would be defeated. In 1983, the contras succeeded in capturing and temporarily holding the small Nicaraguan farming community of El Porvenir, near the Honduran border. Since then, there have been no known similar attempts, although in October 1983 the contras raided the town of Pantasma in the interior. Although both the Ortega brothers play down the abilities of the contras, the Defense Minister acknowledged that the Sandinista Army had not been fully successful in keeping them out of Nicaragua. He puts the number of contras in Nicaragua at 1,000; United States officials in Nicaragua say there are about 4,000 contras there now. Enrique Bermudez, military leader of the Nicaraguan Democratic Forces, the largest of the contra groups, said that American military aid was getting to the contras and that his forces would make inroads against the Sandinistas in the coming months. An American military expert who was in the contra camps just before Christmas said he had observed two groups of more than 100 well-equipped guerrillas leave on a infiltration mission into Nicaragua. Hit-and-Run Raids Seen Contra representatives declined to say exactly what the rebels plan to do with their forces inside Nicaragua. It is generally believed by military officers in both Nicaragua and Honduras that for the immediate future the Nicaraguan contras will be capable only of hit-and-run raids against isolated Sandinista outposts in the sparsely populated mountains. The Sandinistas also say the contras may in desperation undertake a spectacular commando raid against Soviet-supplied helicopters as a way of attracting Congressional attention. They say they believe that there are contras now being trained in the United States for just that purpose. American experts in guerrilla warfare say that if the contras hope to overthrow the Sandinistas, they need to develop a broad base of political support. This, they say, means the contras must develop organized opposition to the Sandinistas within Nicaragua, particularly in the cities. Diplomats and military experts view an urban-based resistance movement as critical to the success of any insurgency. Officials at the American Embassy in Managua acknowledge that the contras face a difficult task in developing a base of urban support. They point out that although there is opposition to the Sandinista Government in the cities, Interior Minister Tomas Borge has been highly successful in suppressing it in the principal population centers. Even if the contras have immediate military success in the countryside, they say, it will be difficult to capitalize on those successes in the cities in the foreseeable future.
