722|1987\01\04|IN THE NATION|Abba Eban, the erudite former foreign minister of Israel, need look no further than Tel Aviv to see the sad results of an official cover-up of government wrongdoing. Yet he's taken it upon himself to deplore ''the spectacle'' of the United States ''having little time for anything except relentless self-investigation.|Abba Eban, the erudite former foreign minister of Israel, need look no further than Tel Aviv to see the sad results of an official cover-up of government wrongdoing. Yet he's taken it upon himself to deplore ''the spectacle'' of the United States ''having little time for anything except relentless self-investigation. Abba Eban, the erudite former foreign minister of Israel, need look no further than Tel Aviv to see the sad results of an official cover-up of government wrongdoing. Yet he's taken it upon himself to deplore ''the spectacle'' of the United States ''having little time for anything except relentless self-investigation.'' A little more relentless self-investigation by the Israeli Government might have avoided the apparent whitewashing of everyone concerned in the beating deaths in 1984 of two handcuffed Palestinians who were in the custody of Israeli agents. As it is, the authority of the Israeli president, who granted pardons without investigation, has been undermined; and so has that of the Cabinet, which requested that the pardons be granted. In order to accomplish the whitewash, Prime Minister Shimon Peres and Foreign Minister Yitzhak Shamir - who was Prime Minister at the time of the murders - muscled a tough attorney general out of office and replaced him with one who would support the Cabinet's request for the pardons. That, Israeli legal experts say, has damaged the authority of the Justice Ministry, too. Avraham Shalom, who was head of Shin Beth, the domestic intelligence service when the two Palestinians were killed, was given immunity from prosecution and resigned from his prestigious post. Yitzhak Shamir, who was Mr. Shalom's only superior, has just been cleared by a police commission of any complicity in the two deaths. Thus - as with President Reagan and the Iranian arms sales -the question arises which is worse: that Prime Minister Shamir did not know what his own intelligence service was doing, as the commission reported; or that as the man to whom the intelligence chief supposedly reported, the Prime Minister did know and has been protected by cover-up? Israelis are left to wonder. And all this, together with the loss of public confidence in Shin Beth, is the result of Tel Aviv's failure to engage in ''relentless self-investigation.'' As Meir Zorea, a retired general who conducted the first inquiry into the captives' deaths, said after Mr. Shamir was cleared: ''This entire affair stinks from top to bottom, from day one until today.'' So does the Iran arms-sale scandal in Washington, and the possible diversion of the proceeds to help overthrow the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua. But the point here is not merely to tell Abba Eban - a friend of the United States - to look to the problems of his own society. Americans, he insisted in a New York Times article, should avoid ''obsession with a single issue that is, after all, not the central human cause.'' Of course it isn't but no one has said it was; and what Mr. Eban and other such foreign counselors really mean is that Americans should not become so obsessed with ''relentless self-investigation'' that they neglect the hopes and desires of allies like Israel. Mr. Eban thinks, for example, that during Washington's Watergate preoccupation in 1974 an opportunity may have been missed for Henry Kissinger to work out an Israeli-Jordanian disengagement accord like those that had been reached with Israel and Syria. Even if Mr. Eban is right, does he seriously suggest Americans should have closed their eyes to the Watergate offenses against law and Constitution so that the Nixon Administration could have pursued its diplomacy unimpeded and perhaps have improved the Middle East situation? Apparently so, for Mr. Eban also suggests that a new U.S. initiative in the Middle East now might prove fruitful for Israel and other nations of the region, and remarks that ''it is for America to decide whether this vision is less alluring or worthy than a prolonged investigatory ordeal.'' This reflects a profound misunderstanding of the rule of law that is at the root of American democracy, and an even greater misreading of democracy's limits. Nothing undermines that rule, hence democracy, more than the ability of some temporary government, even for purposes believed good, to set aside the law, or distort it, or ignore it - as Israelis may be learning from their own experience. A democracy's foreign policy, moreover, is never stronger than the confidence of its people in the integrity of those who conduct it - which Israelis might also have learned from their war in Lebanon. That confidence has been impaired in the United States, and cannot be restored by cover-up or closed eyes. Confidence in the Reagan Administration may not be restored by ''prolonged investigatory ordeal'' either. But confidence in the rule of law can be - a prospect that does indeed seem worthier than new diplomatic gestures by a sadly discredited President.
