723|1987\01\04|With a Shift of Gravity, Congress Begins Era|THE opening of the 100th Congress Tuesday brings an end to an extraordinary interregnum. In only 11 weeks since the 99th Congress adjourned, the political world has been transformed. The November elections and the Iran-contra arms affair overturned many of the realities and assumptions of the last six years.|THE opening of the 100th Congress Tuesday brings an end to an extraordinary interregnum. In only 11 weeks since the 99th Congress adjourned, the political world has been transformed. The November elections and the Iran-contra arms affair overturned many of the realities and assumptions of the last six years. THE opening of the 100th Congress Tuesday brings an end to an extraordinary interregnum. In only 11 weeks since the 99th Congress adjourned, the political world has been transformed. The November elections and the Iran-contra arms affair overturned many of the realities and assumptions of the last six years. Throughout those years, President Reagan's immense popularity and credibility made the White House the Government's undisputed center of gravity. The President's agenda was the national agenda. He did not win every battle with Congress, but his priorities established the framework for the debate. But suddenly, the Administration is on the defensive; Mr. Reagan's standing in the polls has plunged; both houses of Congress are in Democratic hands for the first time since the Reagan era began, and Congress is about to place the Administration's most glaring failure under a microscope. Suddenly, the center of gravity has shifted to Capitol Hill. This unanticipated development brings responsibility and risk. With new leaders in both houses, and with the next Presidential election cycle already under way, this Congressional session promises to be a time of intense personal and institutional testing. The investigations of the Iran-contra affair by two select committees, with all the resonances of Watergate that the very words summon up, will dominate the atmosphere for the foreseeable future. That, too, is both an opportunity and a challenge. The committees - 11 senators, most of them quite senior, and 15 House members, a flammable mixture of Democratic committee chairmen and scrappy young conservative Republicans - were born in a bipartisan glow of professed determination to get at the truth, but the bipartisan spirit may eventually wear thin. If so, Congress could easily squander the unusual degree of public support and confidence with which it is entering the new year. Polls usually place Congress far down on the list of institutions trusted by the public. But a New York Times/CBS News Poll Nov. 30 showed that, by more than 2 to 1, the public trusted Congress rather than President Reagan to ''make the right decisions on foreign policy.'' This support could well dissipate if partisan posturing creates the impression of a witch hunt against the President. The dominance of the Iran investigations will give Congressional leaders still another challenge. Time and energy must be found for legislative accomplishments that go beyond reconstructing the errors of the past. Democrats are keenly aware that there will be no one to blame but themselves if the party enters 1988 without a solid record of achievements in Congress. Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, who is about to resume the post of majority leader that he lost six years ago, told a group of national Democratic leaders last month: ''The American people have given the Democratic Party two years to answer one question - can the Democrats govern the nation in the post-Reagan era?'' But fiscal realities remain a tight noose around any creative impulses. With the law requiring a zero budget deficit by 1990, the chances of enacting new programs that cost money are slight. And the mere mention of new taxes makes many Democrats run for cover. The incoming Speaker of the House, Jim Wright of Texas, suggested last month that the full benefit of the new, lower tax rates might be delayed for the wealthiest taxpayers; he was promptly criticized by fellow Democrats who believe that the party is as vulnerable as ever to the ''tax and spend'' opprobrium heaped on it by President Reagan. Both Mr. Wright and Senator Byrd want to move quickly on trade legislation, a focus of the Democrats' efforts in the fall campaigns. This week the Speaker will reintroduce an omnibus trade bill that was denounced as protectionist by President Reagan last year and never reached the Senate floor. Mr. Wright said Friday that overcoming the trade deficit was ''the first imperative'' of the session and that the bill would serve as a starting point for debate. There will be quick floor action in both houses to pass the $18-billion renewal of the Clean Water Act. The bill had been approved unanimously but was vetoed after Congress adjourned by Mr. Reagan, who denounced it as ''budget-busting'' again yesterday. Both houses also plan early consideration of a highway aid bill and arms control issues. President Reagan's budget for the 1988 fiscal year will be presented tomorrow; it exceeds a trillion dollars, for the first time, and is certain to get a skeptical reception. In a preview last week, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger sought an additional $2.8 billion in the current fiscal year; legislators responded briskly that the Pentagon would have to convince them the need was an emergency. But the freedom Congress has to disregard the Administration's spending priorities does not ease the task of making and defending choices of its own. For instance, Democrats would much prefer to reject such Administration proposals as a halving of aid to mass transit. But the budget-balancing law set a 1988 deficit ceiling of $108 billion; the projection last week was $174.5 billion; more than $65 billion in savings must be found somewhere if the target is to be met. Personnel Questions, Early and Late Some delicate personnel matters must be resolved early in the session: Will Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin remain as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee? Will Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana fend off a challenge from Jesse Helms of North Carolina for the seat of ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee? And the ultimate personnel question in politics, who will be the next to occupy the White House, will be a strong motif. Both the Senate and House are home to some already running hard and to some considering whether to try. In the former category are Senator Robert Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader; Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware and the new Judiciary Committee chairman, and Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of upstate New York. The possible candidates include Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the Democrat who will be chairman of the Armed Services Committee. It is a confusing picture so far. But if there is one lesson from the interregnum that is about to end, it is that a lot can happen in a very short time. POLITICAL EROSION
