724|1987\01\04|DELHI'S POOR GET 2 BLANKETS BUT LITTLE ELSE|Shivering in the biting evening cold, hundreds of poor and ill-clad men, homeless and anonymous, slip every night into the warmth of a huge concrete dormitory next to the Delhi railroad station in the old walled sector of the capital.|Shivering in the biting evening cold, hundreds of poor and ill-clad men, homeless and anonymous, slip every night into the warmth of a huge concrete dormitory next to the Delhi railroad station in the old walled sector of the capital. Shivering in the biting evening cold, hundreds of poor and ill-clad men, homeless and anonymous, slip every night into the warmth of a huge concrete dormitory next to the Delhi railroad station in the old walled sector of the capital. Inside, they stand in lines to collect their quota of two blankets apiece from the dormitory supervisor and then look for a sleeping place. When they find a space that is unoccupied by a huddled, prostrate form, they quickly settle down, putting down their blankets and making themselves as comfortable as possible. They receive nothing else - no food or medical assistance. For many poor but able-bodied men, it provides an alternative to sleeping in the open. Already, more than 100 people are reported to have died in a cold spell sweeping the plains of northern India. #5,000 People Every Night There are six such shelters run by the Delhi Development Authority, a sprawling Government construction concern in the capital. They take in about 5,000 people every night in the winter, although social workers familiar with the problem say this is only a fraction of the homeless population. ''We have no families or homes in Delhi,'' said Ram Prasad, from the Garhwal district in the state of Uttar Pradesh. ''We come from far away to earn our living and, very often, until we find a steady job and a place to stay, we live in this shelter.'' Mr. Prasad, a cheerful, short man with a quick laugh, says he works as a cook. The shelter is just off the main road that cuts across part of the walled city. Painted a Dirty Yellow But the noise of the outside world is muted in the shelter, which is painted a dirty yellow outside and is open all year long. The air inside is thick with cigarette smoke and the murmur of conversation. The seekers of shelter are men working in the tiny restaurants of the city, rickshaw drivers, pushcart vendors, construction workers and some beggars, too. They are young and old and come from around India, seeking hope and work. Some have deserted their families; others want to go back. They speak the many languages of this diverse land. A color television set entertains them, but most are too far away to see the programs clearly. A small group mostly of younger men sits before the set, watching with rapt attention as a bharat natyam dancer goes through her intricate paces. There are lights that stay switched on throughout the night and grimy ceiling fans. There are no windows, only a series of ventilators and exhaust fans to let in fresh air. The burly, mustached guard at the gate says the door is never locked at night so that people can enter. 'No Drinking or Gambling' ''Any poor person can come in, but we don't allow drinking, gambling or women,'' the guard, Ram Kanda, said. The shelter near the railway station can take about 2,000 people and is the biggest in Delhi. There are other shelters, including places run by private agencies, but they are much smaller. According to Surrender Saini, the chief of the Bharat Sevak Samaj, a voluntary social welfare group, the shelters were begun in the 1950's when the Samaj took Jawaharlal Nehru around some of the workers colonies in the city. Nehru, the country's first Prime Minister, supported the idea of homes for the homeless. At that time, Miss Saini said in an interview, the number of people who slept on Delhi's sidewalks was estimated at 100,000. That figure is believed to have increased by three times, social welfare experts say. Increasing Number of Shelters The Delhi Development Authority is also increasing the number of shelters to take care of the influx of newcomers into the city from the countryside, who come in search of jobs and hopes of ''making it big,'' as Miss Saini says. Most of the homeless say they have few complaints. ''We get a place to sleep, and that is a blessing,'' said a man in black trousers and shirt, who identified himself as Satish Kumar. But Mr. Kumar, who talked with a visitor as a crowd gathered, said that they wanted cleaner toilets. He also said sweepers would allow them the use of the toilet only if they were paid 25 paisa (about 2 cents) each time. ''That is not right, it is unjust,'' said Tapan Kumar, a youth. He and others also said they were woken up around 6 A.M. and asked to leave, although the official closing time is 7 A.M. ''It is very cold at that time, and we don't get work until the markets open several hours later,'' said Mr. Kumar, who wore a scarf across his head. Delhi officials said they had not heard about the allegations. Mr. Kumar, who is barely 18, left his home in Calcutta after a quarrel with his father eight years ago and has lived every night at the shelter. He works as a helper at the messy, roadside cafes that proliferate here, but says he would now like to go back to Calcutta. ''I have never written to them, and they have never asked me to return,'' the youth said. ''But if I can save enough money, I will leave this place and go.'' Most of those interviewed said they earned five to nine rupees every day (about 40 to 70 cents) if they got work.
