725|1987\01\04|OPPOSITION SEEKS STATEHOOD FOR MEXICO CITY|In the early morning darkness a few weeks ago, someone bombed a statue of Venustiano Carranza, the Mexican revolutionary hero. The statue was toppled, and some nearby windows were shattered.|In the early morning darkness a few weeks ago, someone bombed a statue of Venustiano Carranza, the Mexican revolutionary hero. The statue was toppled, and some nearby windows were shattered. In the early morning darkness a few weeks ago, someone bombed a statue of Venustiano Carranza, the Mexican revolutionary hero. The statue was toppled, and some nearby windows were shattered. No one took responsibility for the bombing, which caused no injuries, and the police have made no arrests. But the bombing of the statue has been seized upon by the political opposition as another example of why Mexico City must have its own elected government, rather than one appointed by national authorities. In recent weeks, a coalition of four leftist parties and the country's single rightist party has led a campaign to transform the Federal District into a new state to be called Anahuac, with its own governor, legislature and judiciary, just as in Mexico's 31 other states. Manuel Terrazas, the deputy representing the United Socialist Party, said the bombing was a warning of social unrest to come in Mexico City. He said that without truly representative government, the city's problems and social unrest would only grow worse. Given the right to self-government, he said, the residents have ''the capacity to confront the city's problems and resolve them and develop their maximum capacity for creativity.'' He said Mexico City residents had not forgotten what they accomplished working together without Government interference in the days after the major earthquakes 16 months ago, when the authorities were overwhelmed and citizen volunteers rescued thousands of people trapped in buildings. Mexico City, which is one of the world's largest cities with some 12 million people living within its boundaries and six million others living in the greater metropolitan area, has traditionally had little say in its own government. The President of Mexico appoints the mayor, the police chief, the city's attorney general and its judiciary. Mexico City residents can vote in national elections for President and to name members of the Chamber of Deputies and Senate. But they cannot make their own laws, draw up the budget or decide the city's priorities as it tries to manage growth fueled by an unabated influx of people from the countryside. Seeking to defuse the growing opposition, the Government this week unveiled its own plan to bring more democracy to Mexico City, proposing to create a legislative assembly for the city. President Miguel de la Madrid sent the proposed legislation to the national Congress, which is overwhelmingly controlled by the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, thus assuring that the proposal will become reality. Under the plan, the assembly would have 66 members elected by the residents of Mexico City, but would have no veto power over the mayor, who would continue to be a presidential appointee. In his message proposing the legislation, Mr. de la Madrid ruled out any possibility of creating a new state, saying the seat of the Federal Government and an autonomous government for the Federal District could not co-exist because ''it would attack national unity and undermine the Federal pact.'' Under the Government's plan, the assembly would have 40 members from the PRI, as the governing party is known, and 26 from the opposition parties, even though in the last national election the ruling party won less than 50 percent of the total vote. Opposition politicians say ther opposition's political strength is the real reason that Federal authorities will never permit the Federal District its own government. Miguel Hernandez Labastida, a former member of the Chamber of Deputies representing the conservative National Action party, said: ''If Mexico City had its own government and there were honest elections, the minority parties would control the city, not the PRI. The government and its party will never permit that.'' The ruling party, which has dominated political life for 58 years, has been under increasing pressure in recent years to open up the political system to more democratic procedures.
