726|1987\01\04|CONTRA SUPPORTER DESCRIBES HIS ROLE|A Cuban-American who was reportedly among the key operatives in supplying weapons to Nicaraguan rebels described his part in that effort Friday.|A Cuban-American who was reportedly among the key operatives in supplying weapons to Nicaraguan rebels described his part in that effort Friday. A Cuban-American who was reportedly among the key operatives in supplying weapons to Nicaraguan rebels described his part in that effort Friday. In his first public statement on the subject, the Cuban-American, Felix Rodriguez, said, ''At the end of 1985 I became marginally involved with a group supporting the Nicaraguan freedom fighters.'' Mr. Rodriguez is one of several Cuban-Americans who are said to have been working in El Salvador to assist the rebel supply network. An undetermined number of Cuban-Americans assist the rebels from Honduras, according to many sources here. Eugene Hasenfus, an American cargo loader whose plane was shot down in Nicaragua and who was held prisoner by the Sandinistas, had described Mr. Rodriguez, who is sometimes known as Max Gomez, as a key contact in San Salvador. Statement Read on TV ''My principal concern was the competence and the conduct of the key personnel who directed the supply network,'' said the Rodriguez statement, which was read by the lawyer, Fernando Mendigutia, on Spanish-language television here. ''I never had any knowledge from where they were receiving funds, nor did I have control over the personnel of that group,'' Mr. Rodriguez said. He said that he was recently interviewed by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and that his statement to the F.B.I. was voluntary. The F.B.I. office in Miami had no comment. He said his main reason for issuing his statement was to ''put in its proper perspective certain erroneous speculations'' that have appeared in the press concerning the role of Vice President Bush in the controversy surrounding the financing of the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras. Asked about the whereabouts of his client, Mr. Mendigutia said Mr. Rodriguez was in the United States. According to some of his friends, he recently had a hernia operation and is convalescing in the Miami area. Three Meetings With Bush Mr. Rodriguez said he met with Mr. Bush three times - twice in Washington, on Jan. 22, 1985, and on May 1, 1986, and once ''briefly'' in Miami, on May 20, 1986. He added that ''at no point'' were the operations connected with the contras mentioned during these talks. Mr. Rodriguez, who fought with United States forces in Vietnam, said he went to El Salvador on March 15, 1985, about two months after he first met with the Vice President. He said his principal role in El Salvador was to ''try to implement a helicopter concept I developed in Vietnam to help the people of El Salvador eradicate the Communist insurgency.'' He added that statistics on fighting insurgency issued by the Salvadoran armed forces indicated the ''success of this concept'' and that the Reagan Administration, the Pentagon and Congress had been informed ''to this effect.'' He also denied that he ever discussed the contra operations with Donald P. Gregg, military adviser to the Vice President, or with other high aides to Mr. Bush, until Aug. 8, 1986, ''as described in the chronology of events released by the office of the Vice President.'' Explains Breaking of Silence In his statement, Mr. Rodriguez emphasized that he had decided to ''break the professional code of silence'' because he became ''deeply concerned with inaccurate and repeated allegations in the media which appeared to doubt the truthfulness of what the Vice President and members of his staff have said.'' He did not clarify who introduced him to Mr. Bush, or the role of the Vice President or Mr. Gregg in his job in El Salvador, which was apparently to be a counterinsurgency consultant with the Salvadoran armed forces at Ilopango Air Base outside San Salvador. Neither did he say who was instrumental in his ''marginal involvement'' with the contra supply network at Ilopango. According to some of his friends, Mr. Rodriguez's job in El Salvador has ended because of the publicity surrounding his presence there. ''He's an agent who had been burned out,'' a friend said. ''There is no way he can go back there now.'' HASENFUS TO MEET INVESTIGATORS MARINETTE, Wis., Jan. 3 (AP) -Eugene Hasenfus, who survived the crash of a rebel supply plane in Nicaragua, will meet here next week with Federal investigators, his attorney said today. The lawyer, Ernest N. Pleger, said two F.B.I. agents would interview Mr. Hasenfus on Monday and Tuesday. A Customs Service official from Miami is also scheduled to meet with Mr. Hasenfus on Tuesday, Mr. Pleger said. He said Mr. Hasenfus's information might be forwarded to Congressional committees for investigations into arms smuggling to Nicaraguan rebels. Mr. Hasenfus, a 45-year-old former marine, was captured by Nicaragua on Oct. 6, the day after his plane was shot down. A Nicaraguan tribunal sentenced him to 30 years in prison for terrorism and other crimes, but he was pardoned Dec. 17 and released.
