728|1987\01\04|VIA ADDICT NEEDLES, AIDS SPREADS IN EDINBURGH|Dr. J. R. Robertson encountered the first of the terminal cases recently in the slums of Muirhouse, and he estimated eight months of life were left to the despairing 21-year-old woman infected by her lover, a drug addict.|Dr. J. R. Robertson encountered the first of the terminal cases recently in the slums of Muirhouse, and he estimated eight months of life were left to the despairing 21-year-old woman infected by her lover, a drug addict. Dr. J. R. Robertson encountered the first of the terminal cases recently in the slums of Muirhouse, and he estimated eight months of life were left to the despairing 21-year-old woman infected by her lover, a drug addict. So has this stolid city begun playing out one of the grislier aspects of Britain's initial encounter with the deadly disease called AIDS. Acquired immune deficiency syndrome has been on the streets of Edinburgh for only two years, but already it is rated at epidemic proportions by doctors who point to the peculiar group-sharing of heroin by the city's drug addicts as an enormously infectious factor. Because a well-intentioned crackdown on drug paraphernalia forced the city's addicts to share dirty needles and syringes in recent years, the infection has hit rates far more exorbitant than anywhere else in the United Kingdom. The city had 7 out of 10 of Scotland's AIDS cases, as of November, and intravenous drug abusers here in the slums account for more than three of five of them. Spread of the Disease ''We have leapfrogged the American experience with the gay community, which has had time to be better prepared,'' said Dr. Robertson. He was hardly crowing because the city's 1,200 infected drug abusers are spreading the disease, with 300 female partners and 25 newborn babies turning up as virus carriers. At the same time, the Government has not yet acted on a recommendation of Scottish health experts that free clean needles and syringes be provided to the addicts to better contain the disease. Glasgow, with no similar needle ban, has twice as many drug abusers but they account for far fewer AIDS cases. ''The gravity of the problem is such that on balance the containment of the spread of the virus is a higher priority in management than the prevention of drug misuse,'' the Scottish Committee on HIV Infection declared, cautioning that the disease was ''a serious threat to the general population.'' HIV is one name for the AIDS virus. Also known as HTLV-3 or LAV, the virus spreads through the blood supply, as on shared hypodermic needles, and through sexual intercourse. Beyond the organic illness, Edinburgh is experiencing a grinding combination of public bewilderment and press sensationalism. Camera crews arrive looking for deathbed tableaux, a phenomenon that is perhaps months away at the rate of AIDS infection. Filming of Addicts Neighborhood workers complain that at least one addict has been paid by television journalists to allow filming of his heroin injecting. Such melodramatic touches outrage medical professionals and social workers concerned about a public debate that at times veers toward such notions as forced national testing of immigrants or even the general population. The British Government is preparing AIDS pamphlets to circulate nationally, even as its critics accuse it of underfunding research and overfocusing on the ''Tory morality'' of monogamy as a cure. As the debate grows, replete with public-opinion polls of the healthy majority, doctors are trying to stretch limited resources to deal with the hundreds of illnesses and deaths they expect. Only six active cases of terminal AIDS illness were reported in all of Scotland toward the end of 1986, but doctors estimate this will soon begin growing at a rate of more than 140 a year. Britain has been behind larger parts of the world in experiencing the disease, and Dr. Robertson has visited the United States to take advantage of the four years' extra clinical and research work there. Tracking the Virus He has spent the last year trying to track the virus and its carriers in the city, and he was not surprised at the grim milestone one evening in November in quietly diagnosing his first active case and terminally ill victim in the scores he has marked in the busy Muirfield drug community. ''The public is going to panic,'' he said at his crowded public health medical practice, referring to the second wave of the problem, the actual illnesses and death that follow the initial alarm over the discovery of AIDS carriers. ''Some of our bairns are sick, and we've got to help them,'' a Scotsman proud of his homosexuality said at a recent public debate that was heated as speakers complained that the Government had engaged in too little research and too much stigmatization of the victims. Some contrasted the AIDS concern with the relative unconcern over the 100,000 annual deaths in Britain related to cigarette smoking. Most were incensed by the view of a city councilman, Tony Lester, who said the AIDS threat was equivalent to the war against Nazi Germany and those infected should be forced onto an island. Against Homosexuality ''Recriminalize homosexuality,'' he proposed, along with quarantining all addicts and banning all African immigrants. Hooting him in the back of the room was Heather Black, a social worker born in the Muirfield slum who runs Self Help Advice on Drug Addiction, a busy private agency in the neighborhood on the fringe of the city. She was furious that views such as Mr. Lester's have drawn so much attention when, she said, the long-festering conditions underlying addicition such as poverty, joblessness and a six-year wait for public housing draw little interest and insufficient Government efforts. ''There's loads of other problems intertwined,'' she said, describing gray-haired residents who have never had work and have been on the dole all their lives. ''Youth unemployment here is running over 45 percent. The central Government has never done anything about the heroin, why should we expect something from them over AIDs?'' 'Bereavement Training' Classes Similar complaints are being voiced at other drug treatment centers such as The Leith Group on Henderson Street, where workers say they are taking classes in ''bereavement training'' to prepare for the expected terminal illnesses from AIDS.
