729|1987\01\04|WESTERN INFLUENCE WORRIES SINGAPORE CHIEF|Lee Kuan Yew is the only Prime Minister the people of independent Singapore have ever known. And so its 2.5 million citizens - an ethnic mix of Chinese, Malay, Indian and European - have grown accustomed to Mr. Lee's propensity for poking into all corners of their lives. He is at it again. With Singapore reaching the living standards of Western Europe, the Prime Minister, who was educated in Britain, is concerned that the country is losing some of its|Lee Kuan Yew is the only Prime Minister the people of independent Singapore have ever known. And so its 2.5 million citizens - an ethnic mix of Chinese, Malay, Indian and European - have grown accustomed to Mr. Lee's propensity for poking into all corners of their lives. He is at it again. With Singapore reaching the living standards of Western Europe, the Prime Minister, who was educated in Britain, is concerned that the country is losing some of its Lee Kuan Yew is the only Prime Minister the people of independent Singapore have ever known. And so its 2.5 million citizens - an ethnic mix of Chinese, Malay, Indian and European - have grown accustomed to Mr. Lee's propensity for poking into all corners of their lives. He is at it again. With Singapore reaching the living standards of Western Europe, the Prime Minister, who was educated in Britain, is concerned that the country is losing some of its Asian cultural bearings. Confucian principles should guide public life, he said in a recent interview at his official residence. He is worried about the unsettling effects of Western individualism on an Eastern society. But at home, he said, it is time for men to abandon their Asian preference for submissive women. He thinks the wrong people - the least educated in a society with widespread educational opportunity - are having the children. University-educated women have their minds on careers. At a recent student forum, a young woman asked Mr. Lee, 63 years old, why he was ''hounding'' female graduates to have babies. He replied that maybe it was a mistake to give Singaporean women so much equality. ''I was in my 30's when we made that decision,'' he told his questioner. He and his wife, the former Kwa Geok Choo, competed for top honors at Cambridge University. ''My wife was educated,'' he said. ''There was no trouble. Proceed!'' ''It was a ghastly mistake,'' he said. Does that mean he wants to reverse policies that made Singapore's women Asia's most privileged? Will he restore polygamy, as many women fear? ''We can't go back,'' he said in the interview. Instead, a radically new trend could be coming: educated but unmarried women having children and raising them as single parents. He called it ''the next step down the road that the Western woman has taken.'' ''I don't welcome it,'' he added.  ''The problem is a male problem,'' he said. ''It's a problem of a male cultural lag. Sterotypical Chinese family, the woman can't be seen to be wearing the pants.'' He recalled that when the Government set up one of its publicized singles cruises last year to bring professional young people together ''50 women signed up - and 3 men.'' Men were not interested in graduate women, he said. Mr. Lee said one of his toughest jobs in making a nation out of Singapore was building a common language. The city-state, which got limited self-rule in 1959, joined an ill-fated federation of Malaysia in 1963 and became independent on its own two years later. ''People wanted to keep their own languages,'' he said. ''We speak at least five major languages. If you include the dialects, there will be about 20.'' ''So I had to knock a lot of heads to keep the language chauvinists in check,'' he said. Though parents were allowed some choice, he said, children will learn English in school, ''so that across the races, we will use English.'' He said he was immeasurably aided in building the nation by the Confucian roots of its Chinese majority. ''Looking back over the last 30 years, one of the driving forces that made Singapore succeed was that the majority of the people placed the importance of the welfare of society above the individual, which is a basic Confucianist concept,'' Mr. Lee said. This provided ''a certain social cohesion that enables us to avoid the industrial strife that has plagued so many countries, even developing ones, before there are many fruits to distribute.'' ''One of the sharpest distinctions between an American way of resolving disputes and a Chinese or Japanese or Korean or Vietnamese way,'' he said, ''is the belief you have that you can resolve all disputes by slamming each other with points and counterpoints, and you get the truth revealed and everything is resolved.'' ''There is no such fundamental faith in this method of resolving conflicts in Confucianist societies,'' he said. ''Hence, the remarkably few lawyers they have, even in Japan, as compared to American societies.''
