731|1987\01\04|WHAT PRICE FAME?|In the year 1697 a tall young man named Peter, but not yet the Great, had some trouble in the Netherlands: He was mobbed by curious Dutch citizens who did not respect his wish for anonymity and privacy. When the Emperor of Russia sailed his boat on the IJssel, other craft would accost him. In a fury he drove away a mail-boat by throwing empty bottles at the captain's head, an unusual form of naval warfare.|In the year 1697 a tall young man named Peter, but not yet the Great, had some trouble in the Netherlands: He was mobbed by curious Dutch citizens who did not respect his wish for anonymity and privacy. When the Emperor of Russia sailed his boat on the IJssel, other craft would accost him. In a fury he drove away a mail-boat by throwing empty bottles at the captain's head, an unusual form of naval warfare. In the year 1697 a tall young man named Peter, but not yet the Great, had some trouble in the Netherlands: He was mobbed by curious Dutch citizens who did not respect his wish for anonymity and privacy. When the Emperor of Russia sailed his boat on the IJssel, other craft would accost him. In a fury he drove away a mail-boat by throwing empty bottles at the captain's head, an unusual form of naval warfare. Last year, General Romadonovsky had a similar problem in the City of Atlanta. The General, or rather the actor who played that role in the television miniseries ''Peter the Great,'' was surrounded by women while competing in the National Swiss Teams at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals. These were not kibitzers interested in the bidding and play, but fans anxious to get as close as possible to Omar Sharif. He resisted the temptation to react in the violent manner of his Emperor, but eventually ventured a mild protest: ''Ladies, I have posed for photographs and signed autographs for you. But I came here to play bridge and I'd be grateful if you would allow my teammates to reach the table so that I can find out whether we have qualified for tomorrow's play.'' There was some evidence to suggest that the unfavorable circumstances had an impact on Sharif's technical performance. On the diagramed deal he spotted an unusual play too late. As South he had a problem when his partner opened one no-trump, showing 15-17 points, and East overcalled two hearts. He needed a way to invite game in spades, which can be done with the Lebensold convention: two no-trump, requiring three clubs with three spades to follow. As this convention was not in the partnership repertoire he had to jump to three spades, a slight overbid. The contract was not a good one, with three top losers and problems in both minor suits, but it was far from hopeless after the lead of the heart jack. The heart king was marked with East, so South won with the ace in dummy. He cashed the king and ace of spades and led a club, won by East's king. The shift was to a diamond, and Sharif cleared his first hurdle in fine style by playing the queen. He judged correctly that West held the ace and jack, so it was important to prevent a diamond continuation. Playing any other diamond would have been fatal, for West would have covered to force the king, and the road would have been open for the defense to take four tricks. West took the ace and led a club, won by East and producing this position after a diamond lead to dummy's king: South now pinned his hopes on scoring the club ten as well as the queen, which would permit him to discard a diamond from the dummy. This play led to defeat, and he later apologized for missing an unusual possibility. ''If I had led the heart queen in the six-card ending,'' he suggested, ''I would have forced West to protect hearts and caught him in a triple squeeze.'' His expert teammates accepted the apology and failed to come to his analytical rescue. As he saw later, the squeeze is an illusion: West can throw a diamond if South leads one trump, and can afford to unguard any suit if the last trump is led. Sharif did not consider blaming his gallery of intrusive fans for his slight post-mortem error. But one can hope that fans will be more considerate if, as is likely, he plays in New York late in 1987 during the Broadway run of ''Interpreters.'' Perhaps the solution is to avoid advance publicity, of his play rather than the play; but that did not help Peter the Great. BRIDGE
