733|1987\01\04|TEACHING BASIC SKILLS TERMED SCHOOLS' ROLE|I read with interest the Dec. 14 Opinion Page article by Susan N. Wilson, wherein she called for mandatory sex education in the schools. She maintains that by doing so, we will be providing a service that addresses the growing problem of teen-age pregnancies, abortions, AIDS, etc.|I read with interest the Dec. 14 Opinion Page article by Susan N. Wilson, wherein she called for mandatory sex education in the schools. She maintains that by doing so, we will be providing a service that addresses the growing problem of teen-age pregnancies, abortions, AIDS, etc. I read with interest the Dec. 14 Opinion Page article by Susan N. Wilson, wherein she called for mandatory sex education in the schools. She maintains that by doing so, we will be providing a service that addresses the growing problem of teen-age pregnancies, abortions, AIDS, etc. Although Ms. Wilson is well-intentioned, I suspect that her ideas will not resolve the problem in the areas cited, not because young people are ignorant but because of the destruction of long-held and now-discarded moral values. Ms. Wilson seems to think that the answer lies in teaching children as young as the kindergarten level about all manner of heterosexual and homosexual activities and the precautions necessary to guarantee safety from disease. The function of our school system should be to teach basic skills (e.g., the three ''R's'' and good citizenship). Social services and sex education are not the answers to a very complex problem that has a rather simple solution if only parents, teachers, religious leaders and social planners had either the brains or the guts to implement it. And that is that promiscuity and ''Great Society'' social programs have been a dismal failure. On another note, one must ask why was it necessary for Ms. Wilson to identify the New Jersey Catholic Conference in her article? There is no question but that kicking the Catholic Church is a popular participatory sport of people on the left. The family is the basic unit of society. It would seem that the purpose of this latest ''necessary'' program is to break up families before they have a chance to form. ANDREW J. MAC DONALD Fanwood
