737|1987\01\04|A PLEA TO DENY BAIL IF A VIOLENT CRIME IS COMMITTED|BEING the victim of a violent crime like rape, assault or armed robbery is an experience that is at once angering and frightening.|BEING the victim of a violent crime like rape, assault or armed robbery is an experience that is at once angering and frightening. BEING the victim of a violent crime like rape, assault or armed robbery is an experience that is at once angering and frightening. Imagine your reaction if you found out that the person who raped or beat you was out on bail for a similar violent crime. It is precisely this situation that has led to the concept of preventive detention: detaining the most violent kind of criminal to prevent him from committing a crime while out on bail. To invoke preventive detention, however, a court must be persuaded at a hearing (held within 72 hours of the defendant's arrest) that there is a ''substantial probability'' the defendant committed the crime he stands accused of, and that there is ''clear and convincing evidence'' that the defendant will almost certainly commit a violent crime if allowed bail. Then, and only then, can the court hold that person until he or she is tried within 90 days. Since we know that a significant percentage of violent crime is committed by people out on bail, there can be little doubt that preventive detention will lessen the incidence of crime. But by detaining people accused of a violent crime are we not breaking down the principle that people are innocent until proved guilty? Are we not weakening our State Constitution? On the contrary, preventive detention for violent crime is only extending a principle, already embodied in our Constitution, that allows for a person accused of a capital crime, like murder, to be held without bail. Consider this situation: A man savagely beats and rapes a victim. The victim dies, the prosecutor seeks the death penalty and the judge invokes preventive detention, as the Constitution allows. Now let's say that the man savagely beats and rapes a victim, but the victim, instead of dying, lapses into a coma. The judge in this case cannot now invoke preventive detention, even if he is sure that the defendant will commit another crime while out on bail. Of course, the judge could impose a high bail, which is often done. But why should a judge have to resort to the hypocrisy of high bail - in effect, creating preventive detention - when this tool of legitimate preventive detention can be made available? Besides, a bail set can mean a bail met.  Suppose the court, having no doubt whatsoever that the defendant will commit another serious and violent crime while out on bail, sets a high bail in an effort to keep the defendant off the streets? But the defendant is well-off or has rich friends and meets the bail. The court has no recourse but to release him. The court is handcuffed by the law. I've already alluded to some of the safeguards against abuse in a bill, of which I am the chief sponsor. The measure has already passed the Assembly and is now before the State Senate. Let me be more specific. First, preventive detention can be employed only if the defendant is charged with murder, aggravated manslaughter, rape, kidnapping, armed robbery or aggravated arson, or if he has been convicted of one of these crimes within the last 10 years. All of these are first-degree crimes, the most serious offenses that our state recognizes. If the crime was committed while the defendant was out on bail, he can also be held because the judge may decide that the person doesn't have much regard for the rules of bail. Also, if a defendant is brought before the court because he has threatened a witness or juror, the court may decide that the health of the witness or juror may depend on preventive detention. In addition, the court must conduct a hearing within 72 hours to determine if the person should be released with certain conditions, like bail. For the court to deny bail and order preventive detention, it must be persuaded that a substantial probability exists that the defendant committed the crime that has brought him before the court. Further, the court must be satisfied by ''clear and convincing evidence'' - that is, evidence of the highest order - that ''there is no condition or combination of conditions of release that will reasonably assure the safety of any other person or the community.'' In other words, only when the court is absolutely convinced that releasing this person will almost certainly lead to a violent crime's being committed can the person be held without bail. Moreover, anyone held under preventive detention must be tried within 90 days; that is, people held under preventive detention are guaranteed a speedy trial. A person who simply could not make a high bail may not be tried that swiftly. The conditions set for meeting preventive detention are difficult, and should be. But if the court needs to use this power, if the court is sure that the defendant is someone who, given half a chance, will go out and commit a heinous crime, then the judge has this tool of preventive detention to use. Preventive detention is supported by people of every political stripe -from Governor Kean to Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts. And why not? After all, there are sufficient safeguards in preventive detention to make sure that the constitution is protected. And there are sufficient provisions in preventive detention to make sure that the public is safe. The only ones whose security is threatened by preventive detention are the most violent and brutal criminals. And they have been secure long enough. OPINION
