738|1987\01\04|GOVERNOR PUSHING STATEWIDE PLANNING|THE coming year will see the state government run head-on into one of New Jersey's oldest traditions, ''home rule,'' which holds that local municipalities have the right to control their own destinies.|THE coming year will see the state government run head-on into one of New Jersey's oldest traditions, ''home rule,'' which holds that local municipalities have the right to control their own destinies. THE coming year will see the state government run head-on into one of New Jersey's oldest traditions, ''home rule,'' which holds that local municipalities have the right to control their own destinies. The doctrine has been eroded over the last few years, as towns have had to look to the state for more financial help and accept the strings that inevitably go with such largesse. And the New Jersey Supreme Court's Mount Laurel decisions, which force towns to share regional housing needs for the poor, have further reduced each local government's ability to operate without considering the impact of its actions on neighboring towns. But the biggest battle - that between those who view New Jersey as one entity with interrelated problems and those who believe that the state's 567 municipalities have the right to operate with virtual independence - is just taking shape. Statewide planning, a term that only the most secure New Jersey official or legislator would utter in the old day, is being advocated by the Kean administration. The battleground is New Jersey's highway system, which is becoming overloaded in a number of areas because of commercial development. At present, a developer need only obtain the permission of the host municipality to build an office complex or shopping center. Sometimes, the developer may be forced to pay for some road improvement in the immediate area, such as an overpass to serve a complex. But the state is saying that is no longer enough. The increased traffic caused by new developments is turning some major arteries into virtual parking lots during rush hours - the U.S. 1 corridor between New Brunswick and Princeton is a case in point - and some state officials are convinced the solutions are far more complex and expensive than localized improvements can handle. The Kean administration wants the Legislature to pass a three-bill package creating something called Transplan. It would: * Strengthen county control over regional development. * Give the state new powers to control access to state highways. * Assess developers a fee to help pay for needed improvements. Hazel Frank Gluck, the state's Commissioner of Transportation, told the Senate Transportation Committee at a recent hearing: ''We are in very real danger of strangling in our own success. It does not have to happen that way. The forces that are changing our landscape are not wild forces of nature beyond our control. ''It is up to us to decide whether we will plan for the future, or merely allow events to overwhelm us. It is up to us to decide whether development will be an engine of prosperity or a long-term drain on the resources of state and local government.'' Mrs. Gluck said that the state had attracted new companies because of its location and accessibility, but that if it was unable to plan for long-term regional transportation needs. ''We risk having our transportation system swamped with traffic, degrading the quality of life and sapping our economic vitality,'' she said. Traffic professionals, Mrs. Gluck said, use a rating systems to describe the ''levels of service'' that road systems provide. The system goes from ''A'' to ''F,'' with an ''A'' describing a road in Iowa ''where you can drive for miles and never see another car,'' and an ''F'' referring to a ''virtual parking lot.'' New Jersey does not have any ''A'' roads, the Commissioner said, but does have some ''E's'' -those at or near capacity - and that some people would argue that U.S. 1, especially during rush hours, is an ''F.''  POLITICS
