739|1987\01\04|2 AUTHORS SEEK THE VINTAGE DINER|REMEMBER the good old days when you and your date would head down to the nearest diner after a late-night movie for an old-fashioned ice cream soda or a slice of homemade apple pie with a whopping slab of real whipped cream?|REMEMBER the good old days when you and your date would head down to the nearest diner after a late-night movie for an old-fashioned ice cream soda or a slice of homemade apple pie with a whopping slab of real whipped cream? REMEMBER the good old days when you and your date would head down to the nearest diner after a late-night movie for an old-fashioned ice cream soda or a slice of homemade apple pie with a whopping slab of real whipped cream? Diners were big deals then, a part of Americana that is fast disappearing. But two diner buffs who grew up in Roslyn, Donald Kaplan and Alan Bellink, have memorialized these eateries in ''Classic Diners of the Northeast,'' an illustrated guidebook describing 75 vintage diners where you can still order a blue-plate special or a heaping pile of pancakes served with a smile and some friendly chatter. ''I'm a diner person by night - it's in my genes,'' said Mr. Bellink, a music executive at ABC, who went to high school with Mr. Kaplan. ''My father, a cantor, was a diner buff - he would take me to the Roslyn Diner for a big Sunday breakfast where they served the biggest, best baking-soda biscuits I can remember. ''In high school, the diner was the premier place for male adolescents to hang out. Don and I would go there three or four times a week after school and on Saturday nights, with or without dates.'' Both men went their independent ways after school, but they remained friends and continued to haunt diners on every occasion. About 10 years ago, they decided to collaborate on a book. ''I always loved diners - there was something about their marble counters and slanting roofs that was really fascinating,'' said Mr. Kaplan, who works in real estate and is also a writer. ''You could always interact with the community and be yourself and eat good food. One day, Alan called and said he wanted to write a book about diners, and we teamed up.'' After getting a contract, they spent six months in the New York Public Library, looking up every diner in the Northeast in the Yellow Pages. They finally selected 250 that seemed to be authentic and spent the next six months on the road, visiting diners, sampling their food and talking to the owners and patrons. ''For many, we needed a handy supply of Alka-Seltzer,'' Mr. Bellink said. ''Some owners were suspicious and thought we were spies from a fast-food chain. But most were happy to be included, and we finally made our selection on the basis of three criteria: architectural purity, the quality of the food and the friendliness of the workers and patrons.'' But when the book was published in 1980, vintage diners were on the wane and the book didn't catch on. Shortly after, a spate of popular movies -''Diner,'' ''Broadway Danny Rose,'' ''The Purple Rose of Cairo'' - made diners hot stuff again. This fall, Faber & Faber decided to reissue the book. A second printing is in the works.  The book contains not only an illustrated description of each diner, but also a preface explaining the history of these ''railroad'' eateries. Most vintage diners were built between 1920 and 1940, when the expansion of highways and the increase in automobiles set up a need for roadway restaurants where the service was fast and cheap. Unlike the imitation diners manufactured in recent decades, vintage diners were made in a factory, in the style of railroad cars, and shipped to a site that already contained plumbing and wiring. Often the diners came equipped with dishes, silverware and wall menus, and were ready to operate in a number of hours. The grill was always in the front, in full view of the customers, who often sat on bar stools at the counter and traded gossip and one-liners with the grill man or the waitresses. Because they were open all night, many became gathering places for truck drivers and shift workers who liked their long hours and cheap prices. They also became hangouts for high school students who could spend their loose change and idle hours there, sipping on soda and munching on french fries. ''Long Island is covered with diner restaurants with neon signs and huge menus,'' Mr. Bellink said, ''but most of them aren't authentic. Since they resurfaced the exterior of the Roslyn Diner, we had to exclude it. With the exception of the Empire Diner in Manhattan, we decided only to include vintage diners.'' One of the Long Island diners described in the book is Duffy's Diner (now renamed Jen & Lil's) in Center Moriches, which was built in the 1920's. Most of the customers are old-timers or charter fishermen who come in for breakfast after an outing on Sheepshead Bay. Even though the inside has been repapered with yellow and gold wallpaper, there is an original barreled ceiling, a characteristic of many diners. The diner offers meat loaf, roast beef and ham roast specials, adorned with potatoes, vegetables, bread, butter and coffee. But it is most famous for its huge sandwiches, served with potatoes and coleslaw. The Marybill Diner in Merrick, a block from the Long Island Rail Road station, is another vintage eatery, dating from 1949. Built by Silk City, a major diner manufacturing concern, it has barreled ceilings slanting down at both ends to give the effect of a train car, sliding doors, and the original open glass sugar bowls and white porcelain Hamilton Beach malt machine. While all the food is freshly prepared, the diner is most noted for its omelets. Other Long Island diners of note that could not be included in the book because of lack of space are Dave's Diner in Cutchogue, the Westhampton Beach Diner and the Blue Point Diner. Vintage diners are also distinctive because of their authentic regional dishes and their limited menus. For example, New England diners serve fresh fish and a boiled dinner on Thursday consisting of corned beef and cabbage. In central New York, chicken and dumplings are often featured. And in southern New Jersey, vinegar is often served with french fries. ''America is having a love affair with diners,'' Mr. Bellink said. ''They offer a homey, personal touch that we miss and need today. Whenever I see a bottle of ketchup on the table, I can relax.''
