741|1987\01\04|EX-DEFENSE MINISTER URGES FILIPINOS TO REJECT DRAFT CHARTER|Juan Ponce Enrile, who was dismissed in November as Defense Minister, said today that President Corazon C. Aquino's Government was a dictatorship, and he urged voters to reject a draft constitution.|Juan Ponce Enrile, who was dismissed in November as Defense Minister, said today that President Corazon C. Aquino's Government was a dictatorship, and he urged voters to reject a draft constitution. Juan Ponce Enrile, who was dismissed in November as Defense Minister, said today that President Corazon C. Aquino's Government was a dictatorship, and he urged voters to reject a draft constitution. Mrs. Aquino has been campaigning for approval of the charter in a plebiscite scheduled for Feb. 2. The document was drafted by an Aquino-appointed commission, and Government officials and independent commentators have described the referendum as a vote of confidence in her Government. The draft charter would confer on Mrs. Aquino a six-year term ending June 30, 1992. It would bar her from seeking re-election. Supporters of the former President, Ferdinand E. Marcos, and the leadership of the country's largest and most militant labor federation, the May First Movement, earlier announced opposition to the charter, which would replace the 1973 Constitution that Mrs. Aquino abrogated after taking power from Mr. Marcos last February in a civilian-military uprising. ''We reject the draft constitution because the Government sponsoring it is a dictatorship,'' Mr. Enrile said, adding that if the charter was rejected, Mrs. Aquino ''will not be able to govern.'' ''The people will demand her resignation,'' he said. Mrs. Aquino addressed rallies in the southeastern Luzon cities of Legaspi and Naga today, where she said the new constitution would bring political stability and economic recovery. Both cities are considered Aquino strongholds, but the crowds were smaller than had been forecast by local officials. In another development, Communist rebels accused Washington of interfering in this nation's peace process and said they could find no common ground with the Government for formal negotiations set to begin Tuesday. The National Democratic Front, which has been negotiating on behalf of the Communist rebels, made public a letter to the Government today saying the Government's approach to the talks was limited to inducing the rebels to surrender. But Saturnino Ocampo, a rebel leader, said at a news conference that he was still confident that the two sides could reach agreement on an agenda for the peace talks. A 60-day cease-fire began on Dec. 10.
