742|1987\01\04|STUDY, DRAWING LESSONS FOR U.S., CITES RIGOR OF JAPANESE SCHOOLING|In an unusual official look at another country's school system, the United States Department of Education has linked Japan's economic success to the rigor and efficiency of its primary and secondary schools.|In an unusual official look at another country's school system, the United States Department of Education has linked Japan's economic success to the rigor and efficiency of its primary and secondary schools. In an unusual official look at another country's school system, the United States Department of Education has linked Japan's economic success to the rigor and efficiency of its primary and secondary schools. The department, in a study entitled ''Japanese Education Today'' that was made public yesterday, described Japan as a ''learning society of formidable dimensions,'' adding that the ties between schools and the job market there were ''closer and more effective than in most other industrialized nations.'' High Scores for Various Reasons A parallel study of American education was released simultaneously in Tokyo by Japan's Ministry of Education, Science and Culture.  [ Page 10. ]  The two countries' studies grew out of conversations in November 1983 between President Reagan and Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, who agreed that the two countries would benefit from the study of each other's school systems. The Education Department's 111-page study, written by specialists in comparative education, noted that Japanese students consistently scored highly on international tests of educational achievement. Reasons for the high average level of achievement, the scholars said, included well-defined curriculums, close parental involvement in children's education, the high social and economic status conferred on classroom teachers and the ''hard work'' that students devote to their education. 'Implemented on Grand Scale' ''None of these are surprises,'' said Chester E. Finn Jr., the Assistant Secretary whose office supervised the study. ''Our own research has identified principles of effective education. The difference is that in Japan you see them implemented on a grand scale.'' The report cites two important assumptions that underlie Japanese education: ''One is that virtually all children have the ability to learn well and to master the regular school curriculum. The second is that certain habits and characteristics, such as diligence and attention to detail, can be taught.'' While praising the overall achievement of Japanese students, the scholars said Japanese political and business leaders were deeply disturbed over deficiencies in their system, including the failure of primary and secondary schools to develop ''creativity'' in their students. Problems in Higher Education Moreover, they cited ''widespread agreement'' that higher education in Japan ''is not a world-class educational system.'' Colleges and universities in Japan are characterized by poor teaching and light academic demands by faculty members, the report said. The first two years of college especially, the scholars said, ''have become a relaxed period during which students frequently cut classes'' and ''devote much of their time to clubs and other pleasurable activities that they had to forgo during the grueling period in upper secondary school when they were preparing for university admission.'' The study noted that ''education reform'' was a major political issue in both countries, but it said that, in light of cultural and educational differences between the two countries, the movements to improve schools were going in ''opposite directions.'' ''Education reformers in Japan are seeking some decentralization of control, greater diversification of institutions, less uniformity and standardization of curriculum, more flexibility in teaching and more individualization of instruction,'' the scholars said. ''Americans already have state and local control, great diversity in education programs at elementary and secondary levels and an open, diversified higher education system,'' they continued. Consequently, they said, ''most serious American reformers are now seeking a greater measure of commonality in the curriculum and higher academic standards for all.'' Sponsored by Joint Program The studies, which took two years to complete, were conducted under the general sponsorship of the United States-Japan Conference on Cultural and Educational Interchange, a forum of government officials and leaders of the private sector devoted to fostering cooperation between the two countries. In both cases, teams of scholars made extensive visits to schools. The Americans' study includes a comprehensive description of Japanese schools, from the generally modest physical facilities to the competitive environment that surrounds the examinations that students take to gain entrance to the best high schools and, subsequently, the most prestigious universities. The study also describes privately run schools, or ''jukus,'' that many Japanese students attend to supplement what they learn in the public schools. The scholars, in showing the relatively high status of teachers in Japanese society, say there are five applicants for every position. Commitment That Starts Early Although the fiercely competitive examination system has its ''negative aspects,'' the examinations also make some ''positive contributions'' to the overall educational process, the scholars said. ''They buttress academic standards and foster achievement throughout precollegiate education,'' the report said. Moreover, it said, since preparation for examinations requires ''sustained commitment and hard work,'' Japanese students from a very young age ''learn values that will serve them well as the move into the labor force and adult life.'' In an epilogue to the research paper entitled ''Implications for American Education,'' Secretary of Education William J. Bennett rejected the argument of some educators that the homogeneity of Japanese people and other cultural differences between the two nations made it difficult to ''distill lessons for ourselves from the experience of Japanese education.'' For one thing, he said, Japanese schools have been ''demonstrably successful'' in providing their nation with capable workers and a broadly literate population. For another, many aspects of Japanese schools can be traced in part to American influences in the post-World War II occupation period, such as their success in balancing the goals of equality and excellence. What Makes Effective Schools ''Our educational ideals are better realized on a large scale in Japan than observers have tended to realize,'' he wrote. ''Much of what seems to work well for Japan in the field of education closely resembles what works best in the United States - and most likely elsewhere. Good education is good education.'' Mr. Bennett said that in reading the scholars' report he had been struck by how much the salient characteristics of Japanese schools coincided with the qualities that American educational researchers associated with effective schools. These include a ''well-ordered and purposeful learning environment,'' clearly defined goals, coherent curriculums and high expectations for students, he said. ''Leaving aside special schools and programs in the U.S., the Japanese generally seem to expect a level of performance that is closer to children's true intellectual capacities than Americans ordinarily do,'' he said. ''More remarkably, they adhere to these standards for virtually all youngsters, never supposing that one or another category or sub-population cannot accomplish as much as everybody else.'' How to Obtain Copies The American study of Japanese schools was directed by Robert Leestma, an international specialist within the Department of Education who assembled a group of academic experts on the subject. They were Robert L. August, Lois Peak, Betty George, Nobuo Shimahara, William K. Cummings and Nevzer G. Stacey. The study is to be published Saturday by the Government Printing Office. Information about obtaining copies can be obtained grom Japanese Education Today, Office of Education Research and Improvement, Washington, D.C. 20208. A volume of scholarly papers generated by the study is to be published this year. The Japanese researchers' study of American education has not yet been translated into English.
