743|1987\01\04|MATTINGLY PREPARING FOR MORE HARDBALL WITH STEINBRENNER|DON MATTINGLY recently received an envelope in the mail from the Yankees. It contained a contract for 1987. The contract included a proposed salary for 1987 -$1,375,000, the same numbers that filled the blank in paragraph two of his 1986 contract.|DON MATTINGLY recently received an envelope in the mail from the Yankees. It contained a contract for 1987. The contract included a proposed salary for 1987 -$1,375,000, the same numbers that filled the blank in paragraph two of his 1986 contract. DON MATTINGLY recently received an envelope in the mail from the Yankees. It contained a contract for 1987. The contract included a proposed salary for 1987 -$1,375,000, the same numbers that filled the blank in paragraph two of his 1986 contract. ''They offered me no raise,'' Mattingly said. ''I just figured they figured my play wasn't worth a raise.'' The Yankees didn't quite figure that about Mattingly, who almost by acclamation is considered the best player playing baseball today. Like many other clubs, they met their legal obligation of tendering contracts by Dec. 20 using salaries players earned in 1986. At least they didn't cut Mattingly's salary by the maximum 20 percent, as some clubs did with players who had good seasons. Whatever the Yankees' justification for their tender, though, Mattingly doesn't expect contract negotiations to be any easier this year than the previous two. In 1985, the club's methods angered Mattingly and prompted him to speak bitterly about George Steinbrenner, the owner. Last year, club and player reached agreement on the eve of their salary arbitration hearing. Steinbrenner has already said he will not give the first baseman $2 million, but he could almost certainly win that kind of salary in arbitration. ''I'm looking for a one-year deal,'' Mattingly said without indicating what salary he wants for the one year. ''I don't want any problems. I expect to get them. But I'm not going to worry about fighting them. The owners' stand on long-term contracts is fine with me. I don't mind one year at a time. I like it. When I see what happens with Winnyand other guys, I don't want to be locked in.'' Mattingly was referring to Dave Winfield, the primary object of Steinbrenner's verbal abuse. Mattingly has spent a quiet offseason at his New Jersey home, focusing much of his attention on an indoor batting cage under construction next to his garage. He has, however, noted certain developments, or nondevelopments, across the river at Yankee Stadium. ''One thing I've resented,'' Mattingly said, ''is that every time they talk about a free agent, Jack Morris or whoever, they talk about me and Ron and Willie not being signed as the reason they can't sign those other guys. If it was up to me, I'd be signed for next season making $1 million. Two years ago, I wanted four years for $4 million, and they wouldn't do it.'' As for the Yankees' refusal to sign Morris, who offered to have an arbitrator decide his salary, Mattingly remarked, ''The Morris thing really surprised me. When they offered arbitration for him, it was like saying, do you want the Tigers to have Morris or do you want him? It was going to be the same thing - arbitration. I was surprised that they offered that. I figured this guy wants to play in New York. Then I was surprised we didn't jump at the thing.'' In the present world of baseball, though, nothing about free agents really surprises Mattingly, who is convinced the owners have engaged in collusive practices. Looking to the future, when the players will confront the owners across the bargaining table, the game's No. 1 player said, ''It's time for the younger players to step up. Guys like the Baylors and the DeCinces, who have been strong in the union, are going to retire. They've made it nice for the young guys coming up. Now the young guys have to take over.'' First came the change in the way the owners played the free-agent game. Now comes another game that may be a variation on the free-agent theme. Perhaps as many as 50 players on major league rosters were not tendered contracts, which means they are free agents. Their clubs were not doing them a favor by making them free agents. In many, if not most, of the cases, the clubs had an ulterior financial motive. They actually want to re-sign the players, but not at the salaries they would have had to pay under the 20 percent maximum cut rule. By not tendering contracts, the clubs can sign players for salaries that represent cuts far greater than 20 percent. Furthermore, those players who would have been eligible for salary arbitration have lost that status by being free agents. The Yankees, for example, would have had to give Bob Shirley a $600,000 salary, which is 80 percent of his 1986 salary of $750,000, or he could have opted for arbitration. They did not tender him a contract, but they are trying to sign him nevertheless. ''A 20 percent cut would not have been pleasant, but it would have been acceptable,'' said Tony Attanasio, Shirley's agent. ''But they want to go $100,000 below that.'' Slashing salaries, though, may not be the only element of this latest game that parallels the last two years of free agency. It's too early to determine, but the nontendered players may discover that despite their new status as free agents, other teams will not pursue them as long as their old teams retain interest in signing them. Take Darrell Evans as an example. In the last two years, he has hit 69 home runs and driven in 179 runs for Detroit. The Tigers might not have wanted to pay him as much as $634,666 (a 20 percent cut from $793,333), but are they prepared to give up his still-potent (despite his age of 39) left-handed bat? They didn't want to lose Jack Morris either as a free agent, and no other clubs would sign him as long as the Tigers remained interested. Will the other clubs stay away from Evans, too? Steve Balboni is in a similar position with Kansas City. He led the Royals with 29 home runs and 88 runs batted in and, with his back apparently healthy again, could provide some team with power and run production. But will anyone else sign him? ''The Royals would like to sign him,'' said Gary Wichard, Balboni's agent. Craig Fenech is one agent who plans to find out if the unwritten free-agent rules will apply to nontendered free agents as well. ''We're not interested in signing with the White Sox again,'' said Fenech, the agent for Dave Schmidt, who was 15th among 87 American League relief pitchers in the ranking statistics. ''I haven't had any conversations with them since they told me they weren't tendering a contract. If other teams aren't interested, I can connect the dots. If no team makes an offer, that would be proof positive of the extension of collusion, which I believe exists with free agents.'' Tim Raines and Andre Dawson have said they will not re-sign with Montreal. Lance Parrish has said he will not re-sign with Detroit. Bob Horner, whose negotiations with Atlanta have regressed instead of progressed, has said that he, too, will go past the Thursday midnight deadline by which clubs have to sign free agents to whom they offered salary arbitration or lose rights to them until May 1. They are the most talented among the 17 players in that position. They have not received offers from any other teams. They have no idea if they will receive offers after Thursday - no one tested the deadline last year - but they are confident the owners' game cannot extend that far. Ron Guidry and Willie Randolph are growing weary of the Yankees' game. The team's co-captains, they have each been offered a two-year contract at $800,000 a year. They both have rejected the offers, which fall significantly below their 1986 salaries - $1,225,000 for Guidry and $1.1 million for Randolph. ''It'll be a Thursday night 11:30 deal one way or the other,'' Reggie Ringuet, Guidry's agent, said. ''I don't know why they do it. I guess they're trying to put pressure on us.'' The pressure, however, will be on the Yankees if Thursday midnight passes and they no longer have their second baseman of 11 years and the anchor of their pitching staff for 10 years. Scott Nielsen waits, too. Nielsen is the pitcher who led the Yankees in shutouts last season. That achievement placed him in company with such pitchers as Guidry, Whitey Ford, Allie Reynolds, Mel Stottlemyre, Catfish Hunter and Tommy John. Nielsen, however, will not have a chance to add to his career Yankee shutout total of two because the Yankees have traded him to the Chicago White Sox. The only problem is that the Yankees, as has become their custom, have not announced the trade. ''I read about it in the papers,'' Nielsen said, ''but when I didn't hear from anyone, I called the Yankees and was told it was only speculation. But I have to believe where there's smoke, there's fire. I'm excited about it. The trade will give me a better opportunity to make a major league club, although I'd like to stay with the Yankees if they would give me a chance to win a job.'' Nielsen spent 26 days with the Yankees in July, pitching a six-hit shutout in Minnesota July 12. He returned Sept. 1 and pitched a five-hit shutout in Boston on the last day of the season. ''I was going to use that as a negotiating tool,'' Nielsen said. ''Leading the staff was pretty exciting.'' When he is not pitching, Nielsen is an auditor with Price Waterhouse in Salt Lake City. He'll be in his office this week eagerly awaiting official confirmation of the trade. ''I would think they would have to let the cat out of the bag in the next week,'' he said. ''The holiday season is over and it's back to business. It would put my mind at ease.''  BASEBALL NOTEBOOK
