745|1987\01\04|FOR 'OLDER BOYS AND GIRLS' OF CHINA, MATCHMAKING|Chen Gaixin is a fussy romantic.|Chen Gaixin is a fussy romantic. Chen Gaixin is a fussy romantic. Her future husband, she insists, must be an intellectual, work for a research institute or the city government, have a house and be around 45 years old. He also should be ''frank, good-mannered and thoughtful.'' ''Oh yes,'' she adds, he must be taller than 1.70 meters - a hair under 5 feet 7 inches. At 36, Miss Chen is one of a growing number of middle-aged singles. Once past 30, people like Miss Chen usually live with their parents and find that potential spouses are to find. ''There are a lot of 'older boys and girls,' '' said Jiang Yuedi, a merry woman in her 50's who has devoted several years to matching lonely hearts. ''It is difficult for them to find someone. So we decided to set up this introduction room. This is a new thing and a good thing for society.'' A Centuries-Old Practice In Shanghai, introduction rooms like Mrs. Jiang's are cropping up all over town. In many cases, retired workers like Mrs. Jiang have taken over the role of matchmaker, once performed by friends or relatives in a practice that is centuries old in China. A ''love corner,'' as it was known, used to flourish in People's Park here. ''Older boys and girls'' would gather by the hundreds, size one another up and, in many cases, drift off hand in hand. Over this past summer, the number of people who descended on People's Park seeking partners mushroomed and, according to the local press, hawkers began roosting on benches shouting such things as ''one, aged 34, is looking for a 28-year-old.'' The press denounced this activity as auctioneering, and the ''love corner'' was banned. ''It is a real problem,'' said a young woman, whose shyness about giving her name was leavened by her willingness to try her English. ''There are not many situations where boys can meet girls. There is not much privacy. Many people wait too long. They want someone with a house or with a good job. By the time they don't find someone, they are already old.'' Factory Sponsors Dances The woman said her brother's plant, a glass factory with a predominantly male work force, sponsored monthly dances with a nearby textile factory that employs women. A few late-night coffee shops have sprung up downtown, where, the woman said, ''boyfriends bring girlfriends for privacy.'' ''But it is hard to meet new people there,'' she added. Distressed over these difficulties, Mrs. Jiang and a handful of her friends persuaded their neighborhood street committee to allocate them a room in an apartment building. ''When we first started, people did not want to come because it meant they were unable to find someone on their own,'' said Kang Maoying, a neighborhood official who works with Mrs. Jiang. The women printed forms asking love-seekers a battery of personal questions - none too personal - about jobs, salaries, education, their housing situation, habits and hobbies, their needs, and, of course, their height. Space is provided for a photograph. The women collect a fee of about 40 cents. 'Probably Lie About Height' ''When they fill in the form, they probably lie about their height,'' Qu Jieda, one of the matchmakers, said. ''Of course, when people see each other, they realize this.'' Height, it appears, is the most crucial consideration in a spouse, and Mrs. Jiang puts it at the top of her list of why young women cannot find spouses. ''The young men are not tall enough,'' Mrs. Jiang. ''The girls want men taller than they are. Of course, another problem is housing. If the boy does not have his own place, the girl does not want him as a husband. For some girls, the requirements are so high, they wait and wait and get past 30.'' One of the applicants, Qu Leimeng, noted on his form that he was born in 1958, ''the Year of the Dog,'' and was a college graduate and technician. His salary, he said, was the equivalent of $34.50 a month, but he had no apartment of his own. He lived with his parents. Mr. Qu professed to a height of 5 feet 7 inches and wanted a woman who was ''a little cute to do housework and be tender.'' College Education a Factor Mrs. Qu leafed through a stack of applications. ''Men who are tall and good-looking will probably have no problem,'' she said. ''Those a little bit ugly or not too tall may have to wait a while. Girls all hope the boys will be taller than they are. You are allowed only one child, so if the husband is tall, the child will be tall. It is kind of a tradition for women to have tall men.'' ''Of course,'' she said, ''men who are not very tall but are college graduates will have no problem. But if a boy is not tall and, on top of that, is not a college graduate, well, it probably will be difficult.'' Mrs. Jiang said applicants could pore through application forms and select someone from a photograph. ''Then we send out a letter setting up an appointment,'' she said. Discretion requires that the letter go out in a plain envelope without a return address, Mrs. Jiang said. ''Some people don't want others to know that they use our services,'' she added. The initial meeting occurs in the introduction room at the end of a six-foot table on two folding chairs. ''Sometimes they come and, after a moment, they say they will go out and talk elsewhere,'' Mrs. Jiang said. ''If it does not work, we start over,'' she said. ''We try to be more careful next time. There was one girl, 36, who saw 10 people and at last succeeded this year. She wanted an articulate, open, faithful person who would not try and dominate her. She got someone who works in a milk research institute.''
