746|1987\01\04|SIZZLING 'EUBIE!' AT THE CROSSROADS|''EUBIE!'' is just the sort of high-voltage musical jamboree that one can count on the Crossroads Theatre Company to do sizzlingly. And how the company delivers!  For sheer jubilation, the 1978 musical revue, a collection of songs by the composer-musician-performer Eubie Blake, who died in 1983 at the age of 100, ranks with the memorable Crossroads productions of ''One Mo' Time'' and ''Bubbling Brown Sugar.|''EUBIE!'' is just the sort of high-voltage musical jamboree that one can count on the Crossroads Theatre Company to do sizzlingly. And how the company delivers!  For sheer jubilation, the 1978 musical revue, a collection of songs by the composer-musician-performer Eubie Blake, who died in 1983 at the age of 100, ranks with the memorable Crossroads productions of ''One Mo' Time'' and ''Bubbling Brown Sugar. ''EUBIE!'' is just the sort of high-voltage musical jamboree that one can count on the Crossroads Theatre Company to do sizzlingly. And how the company delivers!  For sheer jubilation, the 1978 musical revue, a collection of songs by the composer-musician-performer Eubie Blake, who died in 1983 at the age of 100, ranks with the memorable Crossroads productions of ''One Mo' Time'' and ''Bubbling Brown Sugar.'' All, not so incidentally, were directed by Rick Khan, the theater's co-founder and producer, and choreographed by Bernard J. Marsh, who has performed in many musicals, this one among them. ''Eubie'' overflows with floor-shaking numbers. Witness ''I'm Simply Full of Jazz,'' which ends the first act, and ''High Steppin' Days,'' which starts the second. But the show begins - and ends -elegantly, softly. A pianist wanders into an empty theater. Eubie Blake's voice is heard on tape and memories of musicals past materialize. The concept of a romantic waltz, danced to the melody of ''Good Night, Angeline,'' frames the show. At Crossroads, the silver-haired, radiant pianist is Lillette E. Jenkins, a show unto herself not only as the conductor of an unusually precise and engaging group of musicians but also in solo performances. Just listen to Ms. Jenkins' dazzling display of keyboard pyrotechnics in ''Rhapsody in Ragtime'' and try to remain self-contained. The sampling of Eubie Blake's music heard herein - it is to assorted lyricists, mostly Noble Sissle and Andy Razaf - covers the spectrum of blues, jazz and razzmatazz show music. In ''Roll Jordan,'' one can perceive the beginnings of what came to be known, some 20 years later, as the Motown sound. ''I'm Just Wild About Harry,'' from the musical ''Shuffle Along,'' circa 1921, is, of course, the most familiar song of the lot. Among moments to savor in the Crossroads production, count ''Weary'' and ''Memories of You,'' interpreted in rending blues and spiritual styles by the high-flying soprano of Darlene Bel Grayson. Praise, too, the torrid dancing of Steven Cates in ''You Got to Git the Gittin' While the Gittin's Good,'' Roumel Reaux's witty softshoe routine in ''Dixie Moon'' and Renee Warren's delightfully insinuating vocal manner in such numbers as ''If You've Never Been Vamped by a Brownskin, You've Never Been Vamped at All.'' Which is not intended to slight Luther Fontaine (watch his cartwheels), Lawrence Hamilton, Traci Robinson or Gayle Samuels. Indeed, this entire cast of eight dancing singers - or singing dancers - are, individually and in harmony, splendid. The show runs through Jan. 18, but New Jersey will not be without the songs of Eubie Blake for long. At the beginning of April, another production of the musical will be presented by Newark's Theater of Universal Images, where it will be directed by Lynnie Godfrey, a member of the original cast. THEATER
