747|1987\01\04|PACE KEEPS POWER IN SUFFOLK G.O.P.|ANTHONY PACE, the Islip Republican town leader, emerged from the maneuvering over the Republican choice for Suffolk County Executive as still the most powerful Republican town leader in Suffolk County.|ANTHONY PACE, the Islip Republican town leader, emerged from the maneuvering over the Republican choice for Suffolk County Executive as still the most powerful Republican town leader in Suffolk County. ANTHONY PACE, the Islip Republican town leader, emerged from the maneuvering over the Republican choice for Suffolk County Executive as still the most powerful Republican town leader in Suffolk County. It was Mr. Pace's choice, Islip Supervisor Michael A. LoGrande, who was selected by town leaders for the acting county executive post, a prelude to nomination for a full four-year term in the fall, even though another Pace protege, former County Executive Peter F. Cohalan, was pressured to step aside by leaders because of his unpopularity in polls. Mr. Cohalan was elected to the State Supreme Court bench in November and took office last Friday. Mr. Pace had engineered the unprecedented 1979 Republican primary in which Mr. Cohalan defeated an incumbent Republican County Executive, John V. N. Klein of Smithtown, now a prominent Long Island lawyer. The Pace push for Mr. LoGrande this time was aided by several factors, Republican leaders said. A major factor was the electoral arithmetic. Islip and Brookhaven have the largest populations in the county and the largest Republican votes at a county convention at which the county executive candidate will be formally nominated next year. In addition, Mr. LoGrande impressed Republican leaders with his credentials and his presentation at an unusual daylong session in which 10 potential Republican candidates for county executive were interviewed separately by nine of the Republican town leaders in Suffolk. ''LoGrande had an impressive background; I had never seen his resume,'' said Edward Ecker, the East Hampton Republican leader. Mr. LoGrande was also aided by the belief of several Republican leaders, including William M. Blake, the Republican county leader, that Mr. LoGrande's principal competitor, Brookhaven Supervisor Henrietta Acampora, would not be a strong candidate in the general election next November because of her age, 64 years; her propensity to shoot from the hip publicly, and nepotism accusations when she attempted to put family members on the public payroll. Another leading contender, State Senator James J. Lack of East Northport, was ruled out, several leaders said, because he preferred a special election for county executive early this year, which Republican leaders do not want; his concern about a new candidacy just after his re-election to the State Senate, and the contention of some Republican leaders that the Conservative Party had reservations about him, a point disputed by a Conservative leader, Harold Haar of Smithtown. Some Republican leaders believe that Mr. Lack was the first choice of Mr. Blake, the county leader, but in any event, Mr. Blake served as coordinator of the effort to find a consensus successor to Mr. Cohalan rather than as a political boss with his own preference. ''For the first time, he wasn't working his own deals,'' said a Republican town leader of Mr. Blake, who had incurred disfavor among other leaders because of his positions on races for surrogate, presiding officer of the County Legislature and the House seat in the First Congressional District. Mr. Blake helped develop the consensus for Mr. LoGrande, several leaders said. Mr. Haar, the Conservative, summed up the views of many Conservatives and Republicans about Mr. Blake's role. ''Mike Blake doesn't have the power,'' he said, ''so he's trying to be the oil to grease the skids; he's done the best with what he's got.'' With both Mr. Blake and Mr. Pace playing major roles in Mr. LoGrande's promotion, their roles in the new administration are likely to be scrutinized. Mr. Pace had a considerable influence in the Cohalan Administration with two of his followers, Frank R. Jones and Howard C. DeMartini, as deputy county executives. Mr. DeMartini, in particular, was viewed by politicians as the Pace emissary in county government. Mr. Pace said that both would remain in government even though they are not expected to remain in their present positions, where they often ran the day-to-day Suffolk County government. ''Pete was more of a delegator; Mike is more of a hands-on administrator,'' Mr. Pace said. He described Mr. LoGrande as ''a strong and forceful individual,'' a description that others amended to ''hot-tempered.'' Mr. Pace said that he had ''a good relationship'' with Mr. LoGrande in Islip and that Mr. LoGrande worked with the party. He added that Mr. Cohalan rather than the party originally brought Mr. LoGrande into Islip town government when Mr. Cohalan was Supervisor. Mr. Pace described Mr. LoGrande as ''one of the brightest public servants in the state'' and predicted that ''in the next three or four months he will come up with ideas and programs that will be real eye-openers.'' In the same period, Mr. LoGrande, politicians agreed, will have to walk a fine line with the Republican Party that gave him his chance to be county executive, keeping an arm's-length relationship so that he is not too identified with party leaders and yet satisfying fractious Republican leaders enough that they will unite behind his candidacy in November against the expected Democratic candidate for county executive, Assemblyman Patrick G. Halpin of Lindenhurst. POLITICS
