748|1987\01\04|WESTCHESTER GUIDE|LITERACY TUTORS Literacy Volunteers of Westchester estimates that there are more than 20,000 adults in the county who are functionally illiterate, and that the number has been increasing. ''In the last five years we are getting more high-school graduates who cannot read,'' said Joy Powell at the organization's headquarters on the campus of Westchester Community College in|LITERACY TUTORS Literacy Volunteers of Westchester estimates that there are more than 20,000 adults in the county who are functionally illiterate, and that the number has been increasing. ''In the last five years we are getting more high-school graduates who cannot read,'' said Joy Powell at the organization's headquarters on the campus of Westchester Community College in LITERACY TUTORS Literacy Volunteers of Westchester estimates that there are more than 20,000 adults in the county who are functionally illiterate, and that the number has been increasing. ''In the last five years we are getting more high-school graduates who cannot read,'' said Joy Powell at the organization's headquarters on the campus of Westchester Community College in Valhalla. A countywide effort to train volunteers and recruit students is under way for 1987, with one trainee workshop beginning this week at the New Rochelle Public Library. Tutors must be high-school graduates, but they need no other educational qualifications. Sessions are scheduled from 9:30 A.M. to noon Wednesday and Friday through Jan. 23. Those who successfully complete the program will be assigned to students in their area. Students are accepted from the minimum age of 16, whether or not they are still in school. There is no upper age limit. ''Tutors are taught a mixture of teaching methods,'' said Ms. Powell, ''including word association and sounding out. There is a lot of participation in role playing and acting out potentially difficult situations. Tutors may also get involved in teaching conversational English as a second language, but they do not have to speak a second language themselves. It's sometimes hard to establish communication with someone who speaks almost no English, but students are so highly motivated that it eventually works out.'' She added: ''Recently we have had many women in their 50's and 60's call us about their husbands, who have somehow been functioning without learning how to read for more than 30 years. Now that they are retired, and cannot read stories to their grandchildren, they are willing to let their wives set up appointments for them. Widespread publicity has removed some of the stigma. They realize they are not alone.'' For more information about training programs in other locations, or to register as a student or tutor trainee call 592-2656. SINGERS WANTED The Westchester Choral Society needs singers in all voice ranges for its May 9 performance of Brahms's ''Ein Deutsches Requiem'' at the Performing Arts Center, State University of New York at chase. Auditions are to be held at 7 P.M. each Tuesday in January at St. Bartholomew's Church, 82 Prospect Street, White Plains. Lyndon Woodside is the director. Call 693-2453 for more information. BRAIN DEVELOPMENT Jacqueline Hammer's workshop on developing the abilities of the right side of the brain, attended by capacity audiences each year since 1984, will be repeated next weekend at Wainwright House in Rye. Admission to her lecture, from 7:30 to 10 P.M. Friday, is $10; tuition for the lecture plus two workshops from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Saturday and next Sunday is $90. Ms. Hammer, who majored in painting and art history at Columbia University, and also studied at the Art Student's League and Pratt Institute in New York and in Rome, is a professional artist and teacher with a special interest in ''right brain people.'' ''She works with techniques based on new brain research,'' said Kathleen Madden of Wainwright House. ''Participants learn to control the left brain tendency to classify and judge, and to free the right brain's spatial and visual capacity to see as an artist does.'' ''She contends that everyone has the functional ability to draw, and she employs visualization exercises to loosen up the right brain's creativity,'' Ms. Madden said. ''The right brain controls the left side of the body, which is why many right brain, artistic people are left-handed. Since most education is geared for left brain learning, the need is for more right brain education in order to arrive at a better balance.'' Participants are required to bring a 14-by-17-inch drawing pad, B and 3B pencils, a kneaded eraser, pencil sharpener, scissors and glue. To register or obtain more information call 967-6080. Wainwright House is at 260 Stuyvesant Avenue. FREE CONCERT The Manhattan School of Music is sponsoring a free concert at 2:30 this afternoon in the New Rochelle Public Library. Two of its doctoral degree candidates and a Master of Music candidate at the Juilliard School will perform an unusual program of works by Johann Hummel, a student of Mozart and Clementi; Carl Reinecke, teacher, conductor and composer of operas, harp concertos and chamber music until his death in 1910; and Wenzel Krumpholtz, Bohemian violinist, mandolin player and champion of his friend Beethoven. Rana Park, harpist and doctoral candidate at Juilliard, was a semi-finalist in the 1986 Geneva International Harp Competition, and winner of the Elizabeth H. Hobin Harp Scholarship Competition in the United States. The pianist, Young-Ho Kim, earned his bachelor and master of music degrees at Juilliard as a student of Sascha Gorodnitski and Herbert Stessin, and he is currently in the doctoral program at Manhattan School of Music. Also studying for his doctorate at the Manhattan School is the flutist Hae-Kyung Lee, who has appeared as soloist with the Korean National Symphony Orchestra and in the United States with the New School of Music Orchestra and the Manhattan Symphony Orchestra. Free seating is available on a first-come basis. The library is located in downtown New Rochelle at Library Plaza. REPORT ON DRUG ''Hope For The Future'' is the title of a talk about advances in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease by John P. Blass, professor of neurology and medicine at Cornell University, and director of dementia research services at Burke Rehabilitation Center in White Plains. The program begins at 7:30 P.M. Tuesday in the center's Wood Pavilion, Room G41, sponsored by the Westchester Chapter of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association Inc. The focus of Dr. Blass' talk will be tetrahydroaminoacridine, or THA, a new oral drug treatment recently reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. According to the report, 10 out of 17 patients to whom the drug was administered in a University of California study improved significantly and had no serious side effects. Continued research and testing must be done before the drug can be assessed for widespread use. Burke Rehabilitation Center is at 785 Mamaroneck Avenue. Families of patients and those interested in the subject may attend free of charge. Call 428-1919 for more information.
