749|1987\01\04|TOKYO'S VIEW OF AMERICAN SYSTEM|In a companion report to an American study of Japanese schools that was released today, a Japanese team has concluded that recent attempts at change in the United States ''may be valuable as a reference tool'' for solving problems here.|In a companion report to an American study of Japanese schools that was released today, a Japanese team has concluded that recent attempts at change in the United States ''may be valuable as a reference tool'' for solving problems here. In a companion report to an American study of Japanese schools that was released today, a Japanese team has concluded that recent attempts at change in the United States ''may be valuable as a reference tool'' for solving problems here. But the Japanese side mentioned no specific aspect of American education that it considered worth emulating. An underlying tone of the report was that cultural and bureaucratic differences might be too great for the United States' experience to have immediate relevance to Japan. ''It is not our intention that contents of the current American educational system and reforms in it be proposed as elements of educational reform in Japan,'' the study said. In fact, its chief author, Isao Amagi, said at a recent news conference that it seemed to be the Americans who believed they had something to learn. 'Sputnik Shock' to 'Tokyo Shock' ''Recently, the outcome of common math tests show Japanese kids scoring higher than Americans,'' said Mr. Amagi, who led the study for the Ministry of Education. ''American scholars have begun to question why. They know that Japanese class hours are longer than the Americans' and that Japanese schools are using the class hours more efficiently, and that Japanese teachers impose a lot of homework on kids.'' ''American scholars,'' Mr. Amagi went on, ''seem to share the view that the American educational system has fallen into mediocrity. American kids register very bad scores on international tests. In the past they talked of a 'Sputnik shock.' Now maybe there's a 'Toyota shock' or a 'Japan shock.' '' His group's 75-page report is not nearly so sweeping as the one prepared by the United States team. It is also virtually devoid of firm judgments, pro or con, about specific facets of American education. An earlier draft did draw a few conclusions, but those sections were dropped from the final version. The task of the researchers, who visited the United States, was made difficult, Mr. Amagi said, by the great variations they found as they went from state to state, in contrast to the nationwide uniformity that marks Japanese schools. Criticism at Joint Meeting ''Even to put a trend in American education into historical perspective is very hard work,'' he went on. ''We spent long hours studying what happened in the 1960's in order to understand what is happening now in the 1980's. ''But at a joint meeting with our American counterparts some of them criticized our efforts, saying that what happened in the last 25 years absolutely cannot be understood unless you lived during that period in America.'' The Japanese report characterizes current American efforts in education as an attempt ''to produce excellence.'' But in contrast to Japan, it said, the United States must balance many competing interests and needs. As examples, it cited the American desire to raise educational levels while also avoiding elitism and to offer students freedom of choice while trying to set uniform standards of achievement. Another possible conflict, the study said, lies in the fact that it had been customary for local boards to run the schools but now ''it is the individual states which are taking the initiative in educational reform.'' Dillemmas as Source of Vitality ''It can be seen that American education, in building upon the traditional ideals of equality and diversity in trying to find a new excellence, is confronted with dilemmas and inflated with a kind of crisis outlook,'' the Japanese researchers reported. ''But these very dilemmas are both the energy fueling reform and the vitality of American education itself.'' The report concentrates on high school studies, college entrance requirements and the quality of undergraduate education, all areas of special interest to Japanese as they re-examine their own methods. Quoting from recent studies by American educators, the Japanese researchers cited the worries in the United States about teacher skills, dropout rates, poor student performance and lowered college standards. With a note of mild irony, the Japanese researchers also observed that Americans were seeking greater uniformity and tougher testing procedures in their schools at a time when Japan was looking to go in the other direction. Concern on University Admissions It is widely believed here that Japanese education, while producing nearly universal literacy and a highly motivated labor force, has also emphasized rote learning at the expense of creative thinking. Of particular concern is the university admissions process, which relies almost exclusively on nationwide entrance examinations. The pressure on Japanese youths to do well on these tests is intense, for their futures are determined to a large degree by whether they get into good schools.
