75|1987\01\01|Accuray Fears Loss Of Egalitarian Style|As president and chief executive, David L. Nelson has fostered an unusual culture at the Accuray Corporation. All employees are called associates and part of their salary is based on an incentive program. Perks for management - even special parking spaces - are out and egalitarianism is in.|As president and chief executive, David L. Nelson has fostered an unusual culture at the Accuray Corporation. All employees are called associates and part of their salary is based on an incentive program. Perks for management - even special parking spaces - are out and egalitarianism is in. As president and chief executive, David L. Nelson has fostered an unusual culture at the Accuray Corporation. All employees are called associates and part of their salary is based on an incentive program. Perks for management - even special parking spaces - are out and egalitarianism is in. But employees worry that this could change as two larger companies, Hercules Inc. and Combustion Engineering Inc., bid for the Columbus, Ohio, company. ''It's really a shame to see us going from an independent corporation to a division of a larger company,'' said Glenn Ostel, a company spokesman, ''because it's such a unique company.'' Hercules has said, however, that it will run the company as an independent operation with current management, and Combustion Engineering has said it is seeking the company under terms similar to those offered by Hercules. So there is a chance that Mr. Nelson's innovations will survive under a parent company. On Tuesday, Combustion Engineering raised its offer to $45 a share, or a total of $214 million, compared with a $40-a-share offer from Hercules. Accuray was founded in 1950 and grew from three employees to 2,000 and revenues of $150 million. It makes sophisticated equipment to measure products as they are being made and then controls the production process, improving quality and productivity. The company's main customers make paper, plastics, metals and cigarettes. Mr. Nelson, 55 years old, has been with the company since 1956 and has worked in engineering, sales and administration. He holds a bachelor of science degree from Iowa State University and was a Marine captain from 1952 to 1954. He has been president since 1967 and chief executive since 1970. Mr. Nelson was dealing with the acquisition offers yesterday and unavailable for an interview. Mr. Ostel said Mr. Nelson was popular among employees, and one reason was that he strives to do away with anything ''that smacks of perks or a caste system or anything like that.'' At a senior management meeting, the spokesman said, it came to Mr. Nelson's attention that vice presidents had their own parking places and within an hour the ''reserved'' signs were taken down. Mr. Nelson and the company's No. 2 man, Christopher J. Campbell, 58, executive vice president and chief operating officer, ''have defined the culture of Accuray,'' Mr. Ostel said. ''We really enjoy doing what we do and have the freedom to do it,'' Mr. Ostel said. ''That's why the company is attracting these bids. We're all very flattered.''  BUSINESS PEOPLE
