750|1987\01\04|WINTER DROUGHT IN WEST IDLES WOULD-BE SKIERS|In Idaho's Sun Valley, there is so little snow this winter that would-be skiers were recently invited to attend a lecture on ''Skiing and Good Sex'' and another on ''Rhinoceros Poaching in Zimbabwe.''|In Idaho's Sun Valley, there is so little snow this winter that would-be skiers were recently invited to attend a lecture on ''Skiing and Good Sex'' and another on ''Rhinoceros Poaching in Zimbabwe.'' In Idaho's Sun Valley, there is so little snow this winter that would-be skiers were recently invited to attend a lecture on ''Skiing and Good Sex'' and another on ''Rhinoceros Poaching in Zimbabwe.'' In the Mammoth Lakes region northeast of Los Angeles, many of the ski slopes are so barren that mountain resort owners are trying to lure visitors with promises of good weather for tennis and horseback riding. And in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, where it has not snowed for 34 days, Robbie Beck, an official with the Park City Ski Area, said cancellations were running 40 percent or more. ''It's been so long since it's snowed,'' she said, ''that I don't even check the weather reports anymore.'' As 1987 begins, much of the West is experiencing the worst winter drought in a decade, and resort owners say it has already cost them more than $100 million in lost revenue. Snow Finally Appears Last week the first significant storm of the season finally brought snow to the High Sierras near Lake Tahoe. But resort operators in the area said that they had already lost $70 million this season and that there was little prospect they would ever recoup the money. ''We're like farmers,'' said Kay Williams, who works for the North Tahoe Visitors Bureau. ''We depend on the weather for good crops.'' A year ago much of the West was experiencing one of the stormiest winters of the century and was bracing for floods that eventually washed out thousands of homes from California to Utah. But since early fall precipitation has been running well below normal in most of the region. Temperatures in many areas have averaged several degrees warmer than usual. Unless conditions change soon, meteorologists say this could be the driest winter in the West since most of the droughts in 1976 and 1977 that caused serious water shortages in many communities. Some States Were Lucky Snow levels have approached normal in parts of Colorado, Washington and Oregon, attracting many skiers who canceled vacations elsewhere. But even in these states lighter-than-usual snowfall has forced many resorts to supplement nature with large amounts of expensive machine-made snow. ''We couldn't accommodate any more people if we wanted to,'' said Spencer Videon, president of the Aspen Resort Association in Colorado. Isolated snowstorms dusted the slopes of a few resorts in the West late last week, encouraging some resort operators to suggest that the worst of their problems may be over. But they said that even if weather conditions changed substantially, it would be impossible to make up the earlier losses. 'Beggers Can't Be Choosers' Still, Debbie Kelly, sales director at the Squaw Valley resort near Lake Tahoe, where poor snow conditions have cut patronage 50 percent so far this season, said, ''Beggers can't be choosers.'' Robert Roberts, executive director of the Sierra Ski Area Association, said that only 5 of 21 resorts in the Lake Tahoe-Reno area had even opened this year, and 4 of the 5 were using snow-making equipment to produce marginal skiing conditions. Nancy Newberg of Ski Utah, which promotes skiing at 16 resort areas, said it would take a drastic change in weather conditions and a long spring skiing season to avert a projected decline of at least 10 percent in the $350 million that the promotional agency estimates is spent annually by skiers in Utah. Even under ideal conditions, the resort operators say they have a relatively brief time in which to turn a profit. The period between Thanksgiving and New Year's Day often accounts for about a third of their annual revenue. Linda Martin of the Mammoth Lakes Resort Association near Los Angeles, which says it is the busiest ski resort complex in the nation under normal conditions, said shopkeepers, merchants, gas stations and other local businesses were also suffering heavily as a result of the drought. The average skier spends about $75 a day, Ms. Martin said. ''A year ago we had had 300,000 skiers here by now; this year, we've done zero.'' Following Through With Plans Many vacationers, including many who had paid for their travel months ago or were committed to take a vacation over the holidays when their children were out of school, went through with their plans for a trip to the Western ski slopes despite the poor skiing conditions. This averted an even greater financial problem for resort operators and sometimes led to frantic searches for alternative ways to entertain guests. Although idle skiers in the Lake Tahoe area could head for the slot machines at local casinos, resort operators elsewhere were promoting hiking, fishing, tennis, skeet shooting, ice-skating and other pursuits. ''We might lose on one end of our operation, but we'll recoup on another,'' said Karl Wilgus, an official at Idaho's Sun Valley resort, which has been operating at 85 percent of capacity despite dismal skiing conditions. The lectures on sex, rhinoceros poaching and other topics have helped skiiers pass the time, he said, and may even be included on a regular basis when snow falls once again. Mr. Wilgus said the resort had hired a professional ''cloud seeder'' in an effort to stimulate a snow fall. He added, ''Unfortunately, there haven't been any clouds for him to seed.''
