751|1987\01\04|AIDS DANGER: AFRICA SEEMS OF TWO MINDS|One week, health authorities here completed a pioneering comic book designed to warn Central Africans in simple language about the danger of AIDS.|One week, health authorities here completed a pioneering comic book designed to warn Central Africans in simple language about the danger of AIDS. One week, health authorities here completed a pioneering comic book designed to warn Central Africans in simple language about the danger of AIDS. The next week, officials destroyed videotapes made by a French television crew about AIDS victims in Bangui Hospital. In this capital, where 4 percent of all adults are believed to be infected with the AIDS virus, the seemingly contradictory actions by local authorities in December reflected attitudes common in much of Africa toward AIDS, or acquired immune deficiency syndrome. When talking to their own citizens, African governments increasingly treat AIDS like any other public health problem. When talking to the outside world, African governments appear to seek to hide the problem. In Zaire, a pro-Government newspaper, Elima, recently published a series of six articles describing AIDS and giving advice on how to avoid getting it. 'Serene and Humane' ''Zaire has opted for an objective information campaign, serene and humane, and continues to refuse to allow its fellow citizens who are victims of AIDS to become the object of cynical and unhealthy exploitation by the Western press,'' wrote Kitoto Kalombo, information director of Zaire's Public Health Department. In addition to warning about the dangers of dirty needles and transfusions of contaminated blood, Mr. Kalombo advised Zaireans to avoid ''nomadic sex.'' In another sign of Africa's increasing frankness about AIDS, Jeune Afrique, the leading news weekly of French-speaking Africa, made AIDS the leading article of its year-end issue. ''We must tell the truth,'' the article on AIDS in Africa began. ''Africa is the most affected continent.'' Placing the Blame The author said those responsible for ignorance in Africa about AIDS were ''doctors anxious to avoid panic,'' journalists with a ''misplaced'' sense of responsibility and governments ''that have practiced an ostrich policy.'' But many Africans believe that international discussion of AIDS in Africa puts the continent in an unfavorable light. In November, several Nigerian newspapers published an article distributed by the Soviet press-feature syndicate Novosti on the origin of AIDS. The article implied that the deadly AIDS virus escaped after ''secret experiments at a laboratory developing biological weapons at Fort Detrick, Md.'' The true origin of the virus is not known. According to an article published in Science magazine in November, the earliest known AIDS virus was identified in Kinshasa, Zaire, in 1959. In Bangui in December, Health Ministry officials declined to talk about AIDS with an American reporter, but the problem was openly discussed among residents. Tests in Army Brothels The French Army regularly administers AIDS antibody tests, which indicate infection but not whether a person will develop the fatal disease, to ''African hostesses'' who work in the army's two field brothels, one here and another in Bouar, about 200 miles northwest of here. So far, according to Col. Jean Carrie of the French Army, no French soldier garrisoned in the Central African Republic has died of AIDS. But it is estimated that 800 Central Africans and two Europeans died of AIDS here in 1986. In 1985, a random sample of 327 adults in Bangui between the ages of 15 and 34 found that 4 percent had antibodies to the AIDS virus in their blood. A separate survey of local prostitutes found an infection rate of 19 percent. ''AIDS is a very serious problem in Central Africa,'' said Alain Jean Georges, one of the authors of the survey. Dr. Georges, who is research director at the Pasteur Institute here, said his laboratory performs 100 blood tests for AIDS antibodies a week. Next door to the institute, in the crowded wards of Bangui Hospital, doctors often do not bother to test for AIDS. Instead of ordering a $20 blood test, nurses have been trained to detect AIDS by consulting a rudimentary chart of symptoms prepared by the World Health Organization. In one bed, Fatima Germain, an AIDS patient from Bangui, lay still. Her withered 25-year-old frame displayed several AIDS symptoms -weight loss, fever, cough and diarrhea. Stress on Preventive Care With a population of 3 million people and a Health Ministry budget of $5 million, the Central African Republic spends an average of $1.67 a year on health care for a citizen. To maximize this limited budget, the ministry stresses preventive care. Officials have encouraged Dr. Jean-Louis Lesbordes, a French doctor at the hospital, to undertake a public education program about AIDS. In 1986 Dr. Lesbordes and a local artist, Gosue Daikou, prepared the comic book about AIDS. In recent years, Dr. Lesbordes has repeatedly spoken on the national radio, issuing warnings about AIDS. ''Women have come up to me and have thanked me, saying, 'After you talked on the radio, my husband stopped going out,' '' Dr. Lesbordes said. But the authorities were not so enthusiastic about an interview Dr. Lesbordes gave in December to Antenne 2, the French television network. Employees from the Information Ministry seized the videotape and erased it.
