752|1987\01\04|DRAMATIC RESCUE IN HOTEL DISASTER|He dropped out of the sky like an angel of mercy. When his job was done, he left that way, and no one knew his name.|He dropped out of the sky like an angel of mercy. When his job was done, he left that way, and no one knew his name. He dropped out of the sky like an angel of mercy. When his job was done, he left that way, and no one knew his name. In the first agonizing minutes of the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel, the man, later identified as Pat Walter, a 41-year-old helicopter pilot, initiated a daring rooftop rescue of trapped guests until larger Navy helicopters could reach the scene. For about 45 minutes Mr. Walter, who operates a charter helicopter service based in St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands, plucked hysterical women and children from the burning 22-story building and deposited them safely on the beach below. By his own count he rescued at least 21 guests in his five-seat Jet Ranger before clearing out to let larger military helicopters pick up victims. Mr. Walter had no hoist aboard. He had to maneuver his craft perilously close to the edge of the roof, blinded at times by a column of smoke and heat pouring out of the hotel, encouraging terrified guests to hop aboard his shuddering rescue vessel. One Skid Down on the Roof' ''I could get only one skid down on the roof,'' Mr. Walter said today in a telephone interview from St. Thomas, which is about 120 miles east of San Juan. ''That chopper pilot did one hell of a job of flying,'' said Charles R. Hinojosa, a private pilot who flew over the scene in a winged aircraft in the early moments of Wednesday's disaster. Mr. Hinojosa, a sales engineer, said he was taking a company plane up for a spin from Isla Grande, a private airport near the Condado Beach resort here, when he saw a towering column of smoke about one mile away. ''I thought at first a fuel truck had exploded or perhaps an airplane had crashed,'' he said. Once up on the air, he had a close view of the disaster scene. The burning hotel, like a tall square spike planted at the edge of the blue sea, was engulfed in smoke. Seeing the Smoke About this time, about five miles away at San Juan Interntional Airport, Mr. Walter also saw the black smoke column. He had just unloaded a charter flight of four people traveling from the Virgin Islands to a New Year's Eve party in San Juan. Returning aloft he communicated by radio with the authorities, who said his helicopter was needed. He was given clearance to land at Isla Grande and refueled on the ground with one engine running. He was quickly back in the air and headed to the Dupont Plaza. A police helicopter was already at the scene but the pilot did not think he could land on the roof because it was not flat, said Mr. Hinojosa, who was monitoring radio transmissions as he circled the area. There is a penthouse restaurant cantilevered from the walls of the hotel, and on the penthouse roof is a tall structure housing engineering machinery. On top of that are exhaust pipes and other obstacles that could snag a helicopter's blades and send it crashing. ''We heard on the radio that the Navy and the Coast Guard couldn't get to the scene for 40 minutes or so,'' Mr. Hinojosa said. Guests Huddled in Terror Mr. Walter, observing growing numbers of trapped guests huddled in terror, decided something had to be done right away. ''I realized I could get in there,'' he recalled. But the closest he dared approach the building was to put one landing skid down on the edge of the roof. After coaxing four women and children aboard and bringing them down safely to the ground, he returned to the roof with a police officer who helped calm guests and organize the evacuation. Mr. Hinojosa said the pilot of the police helicopter, apparently emboldened by Mr. Walter's daring, joined the shuttle service, lifting victims and ferrying more rescue personnel.
