753|1987\01\04|NEW JERSEY GUIDE|'BRIGHTON BEACH' ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,'' Neil Simon's comedy-drama inspired by his childhood in Brooklyn during the Depression, opens Thursday at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn.|'BRIGHTON BEACH' ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,'' Neil Simon's comedy-drama inspired by his childhood in Brooklyn during the Depression, opens Thursday at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn. 'BRIGHTON BEACH' ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,'' Neil Simon's comedy-drama inspired by his childhood in Brooklyn during the Depression, opens Thursday at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn. The author of 20 hit plays since the opening of ''Come Blow Your Horn'' in 1961, Mr. Simon once had four plays on Broadway at the same time. ''Brighton Beach Memoirs'' was voted Best Play by the New York Drama Critics Circle and also won the Outer Critics Circle Award. The Paper Mill production, with a cast of seven, will be directed by John Going, who directed ''Inherit the Wind'' at the playhouse in 1985. The play will run through Feb. 8. Information: (201) 376-4343.  CLARINETIST IN CONCERT ''Charles Neidich, a Pied Piper of the clarinet whose eminence among young practitioners of that instrument was ratified last year with a victory in the Naumburg Clarinet Competition, distinguished the American Symphony Orchestra concert in Carnegie Hall with as lively an account of the Mozart concerto as one is likely to hear,'' wrote Will Crutchfield in a New York Times review last March. Next Sunday afternoon, Mr. Neidich will be at Montclair High School for a performance sponsored by Unity Concerts. The program, which starts at 3:30, will comprise Premiere Rhapsodie by Claude Debussy, ''Abrimes des Oiseaux'' (from ''Quartet for the End of Time'') by Olivier Messinaeu, Sonata Op. 167 (''Undine'') by Carl Reineche, Vierstuche Op.5 by Alban Berg, ''Moonflowers, Baby!'' by Meyer Kupferman and ''Grand Fantasia on Thames'' (from ''La Traviata'') by Donato Lovreglio. Mr. Crutchfield found the clarinetist's showmanship was not without visual flair. ''Mr. Neidich is a swayer, a knee-bender and a dancer,'' he wrote. ''In allegros, he describes broad arcs of 90 degrees with the bell of his clarinet, and in adagios, he leans forward to whisper themes in confidence. ''The physicality and the musicality inform and reflect each other in his playing. He knows how to make a sparking climax with the most conventional Mozartean cadences; he makes manifest both in phrasing and body language the tension of a diminished seventh chord.'' Montclair High School is at Park and Chestnut Streets, and concert tickets are $11, $13, $14.50 and $17 (student rush is $5). Information: (201) 744-6770.  BACH IN DENVILLE Prof. Peter Schickele, the medium of works by P.D.Q. Bach - Professor Schickele describes him as the ''last and least'' of J. S. Bach's many sons - will perform in Denville Saturday and next Sunday. Fresh from an engagement at New York's Carnegie Hall, which he says he had renovated at great personal expense, Professor Schickele is making his fourth appearance under the sponsorship of the Friday Evening Club of Morristown. This time, he will present two concerts, at 8 P.M. on Saturday and at 3 P.M. next Sunday, at Morris Knolls High School on Knoll Road in Denville. Accompanied by a 32-piece orchestra, Professor Schickele will present such masterpieces as the overture to ''The Abduction of Figaro'' and the ballet suite from ''The Preachers of Crimetheus.'' Tickets are $12, $16 and $20. Information: (201) 538-6413. THE ARTS AND HOBOKEN ''Heaven, Hell or Hoboken'' is the title of an exhibition and a series of events opening with a reception at 7:30 P.M. Saturday at the O Roe Electric Art Space in Hoboken. The exhibition features the works of a group of Hoboken visual artists focusing on the issues facing their city and other urban centers. Among the issues are housing, health care and living conditions. On Jan. 17 at 7:30 P.M., the Hoboken poets Sheldon Biber, Michael Sobsey and Michelle Holland will express their views on urban life, and at 7:30 P.M. on Jan. 22, the winners of a ''Write a Poem About Hoboken'' contest for teen-agers will perform. Two Hoboken film makers, Nora Jacobson and Phil Danzig, will present examples of their art at 8 P.M. on Jan. 24. The last special event during the exhibition will be at 7:30 P.M. on Jan. 29, when residents participate in a housing forum with a panel of experts. Musicians will perform every Friday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2:30 P.M. throughout the month. The performers will include Carl Huffman, the Electric Chamber Duo, Muruga and Perry Robinson and Rolf Sturm. Among the exhibitors are Bruce Tamberelli, Bob Foster and Sheilah Scully, photographers; Eileen Doster, Adam Simon, Bill Brovold, Betty Jane Seidenzahl and Jim Ryan, painters; Paul Drexel, mixed media; Suprina and Susan Shaftan, sculptors, and Tim Daly, print maker. The O Roe, a not-for-profit consortium of artists, is at 314 Monroe Street and is open from 6 to 9 P.M. Thursday and Friday and from noon to 7 P.M. Saturday and Sunday, or by appointment. Information: (201) 420-0545.  BROOKS TO READ WORKS Gwendolyn Brooks, the author and poet, will read from her works Saturday at the Montclair Art Museum. Filling the formidable shoes of Carl Sandburg as the Poet Laureate of Illinois for 17 years, Ms. Brooks was also the first black woman to win a Pulitzer Prize (in 1950 for poetry). Drawing on experiences and observations from her neighborhood in Chicago, she has written 15 books on the life of blacks in urban America and has two more in progress. Ms. Brooks was recently appointed the consultant in poetry to the Library of Congress, a post once held by Robert Frost, Stephen Spender and Robert Penn Warren, among others. The reading will be at 7:30 P.M. at the museum, Bloomfield and South Mountain Avenues, Montclair. Tickets are $7.50 ($5 for students and the elderly). The sponsors suggest purchasing tickets in advance. Information: (201) 746-5556.  MOZART IN PHILADELPHIA The Mozart Orchestra will be presenting its second of three concerts this season. The performance will be held next Sunday at the Church of St. Luke and the Epiphany, 330 South 13th Street, Philadelphia. just across the Benjamin Franklin Bridge from Camden. The concert will include Mozart's Symphonies Nos. 12 (K. 110) and 31 (K. 297) and Concerto for Flute and Harp (K. 299). The orchestra is directed by Davis Jerome, chairman of the music department at Rutgers-Camden. Made up of members of the Philadelphia Orchestra and other professionals from the area, it is the orchestra in residence at Rutgers-Camden. The soloists will be Adeline Tomasone and Marilyn Costello. Ms. Tomasone is principal flutist of the Mozart Orchestra and of the Opera Company of Philadelphia; Ms. Costello is principal harpist of the Philadelphia Orchestra and principal instructor of flute at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia. The concert, which starts at 7 P.M., is free and no tickets are needed. Because Mozart Society of Philadelphia subscribers get reserved seats and the small, but acoustically wonderful, church fills up fast, an early arrival is advisable.
