755|1987\01\04|TAYLOR PROVIDES A MANY-FACETED SELF-PORTRAIT|In a candid self-assessment, Lawrence Taylor has portrayed himself as ''a plain wild dude.'' And he adds, ''I live life wild . . . I hang with the bums. I hang with the regular people.'' At the same time, he says, ''I've always felt comfortable with myself.''|In a candid self-assessment, Lawrence Taylor has portrayed himself as ''a plain wild dude.'' And he adds, ''I live life wild . . . I hang with the bums. I hang with the regular people.'' At the same time, he says, ''I've always felt comfortable with myself.'' In a candid self-assessment, Lawrence Taylor has portrayed himself as ''a plain wild dude.'' And he adds, ''I live life wild . . . I hang with the bums. I hang with the regular people.'' At the same time, he says, ''I've always felt comfortable with myself.'' In a rare and far-reaching interview, the Giants' outside linebacker acknowledges that he is one of the best ever to play his position. But though The Associated Press voted him this week as the National Football League's most valuable player, only the second defensive player to gain that honor, he says he has retrogressed physically in his six years as a pro and is less enthusiastic about football. He will not become 28 years old for a month. Still, he says, ''I'm a guy who's starting to get old.'' He says he has only two or three years of football left. He does not sound as if he regrets it because he says he has done almost everything he wants to do in football. Underwent Treatments Last winter, on his own, Taylor underwent treatment for chemical abuse, believed to involve alcohol and cocaine. For months afterward, he did not speak with the news media. In midseason, he began chatting, usually about nonfootball subjects, with a few reporters who covered the Giants daily. Then, after games, came a few football comments. In recent weeks, he has talked more, though never with the scope or frankness of this interview. He discussed everything except his problems with chemical abuse. ''I don't want to talk about that,'' he said. ''It's nobody's business but mine.'' It was and is also the business of Bill Parcells. In his four years as the Giants' head coach, Parcells has rid the team of several players he thought had drug or drinking problems. Sources familiar with Taylor's case said Parcells had encouraged Taylor to get treatment and helped arrange for it. When the treatment ended, Taylor issued a statement through the team acknowledging the treatment. In the statement, he asked that the media respect his privacy in the matter. Parcells vociferously defended Taylor's right not to discuss the matter. Parcells Eased Pressure ''Bill has taken so much pressure off me,'' said Taylor. ''He was ridiculed. I think he was the big reason I had a good year this year, not having to deal with the press. ''A lot of people were hoping I would fall flat on my face and wouldn't recover. I didn't fall on my face. Anytime somebody says I can't do something, it ticks me off. I'm competing with myself. But without motivation, I can't get up every day and do it. ''The things I went through served as motivation for me. I'm competing not only with myself but with the people who said I couldn't do it. Bill Parcells said he had confidence and pride in me. I had pride in that. I appreciated that.'' Taylor was certainly not exaggerating when he said he had a good year. He was voted to the Pro Bowl and various all-pro teams for the sixth time. He led the league in sacks with 20 1/2, only 1 1/2 short of Mark Gastineau's 1984 record. ''A terrific year,'' said Bill Belichick, the Giants' defensive coordinator. ''Not as good as 1983,'' said Taylor, ''but good enough.'' One reason for the good year was a change in the Giants' defensive philosophy. Because Taylor is so effective as a pass rusher, he has rushed the passer 75 to 80 percent of the time this year, compared with 40 to 45 percent last year. He has forced opposing teams to change their defensive schemes to block him with a big and quick offensive lineman rather than a running back or tight end he can overpower with his strength and incredible quickness. Not a Victim of All Work By his admission, he has never been a victim of all work and no play. Off the field, he has usually done what he wants. ''I guess that I'm just a plain wild dude,'' he said. ''I live life wild. I play wild, but I do it all my own way. I don't really care what other people expect of me or what I'm supposed to do or how society says I'm supposed to do certain things. I do it my way and try to get the job done that way. ''I don't put on airs or stuff. I don't try to act like I'm high society or go to high-society places. I hang with the bums. I hang with the regular people. I make mistakes like everybody else. But I'm just here doing a job. I'm just a blue-collar worker.'' His salary is not exactly blue collar. In January 1984, the Giants bought out a future contract he had signed with the New Jersey Generals of the United States Football League. The Giants then signed him to a seven-year contract worth $6.25 million. In this, the third year of that contract, his base salary is $850,000. At the worst, he is a middle-aged linebacker. He talks of himself as an old man. ''I'm enjoying football,'' he said, ''but it's starting to get down toward the end of my career. I'm not having as much fun. ''I just have two or three years left. I still enjoy Sundays, but it's hard to enjoy the rest of the week. It's becoming a drag just to go out there now, so it's starting slowly to become more like work than fun. If Bill Parcells hadn't taken a lot of pressure off me, it would have been worse. Gets Tired More and Easier ''I'm a guy who's starting to get old, not as old as some but a lot older than others. I'm a lot slower than I used to be. I get tired easier. I can still run, but I get tired more. There are a lot of moves I used to do that I can't do anymore. That's part of playing football. ''It's not distressing. I compensate with other things. I'm a little smarter than I used to be. I try to use that to my advantage. ''What makes it so hard is that I can't surprise anybody anymore. In the Green Bay game, a lot of people were beating tattoos on me. I got hit so many times it was unreal. I don't think I can last two more years and get beat up like that 16 games a year.'' Enthusiasm often makes up for shortcomings, but there, too, Taylor says he is not what he once was. ''I think I'm less enthusiastic than I used to be,'' he said. ''I'm like an old veteran. You pick your spots to be enthusiastic, but you don't want to waste your energy like a 22-year-old. ''I try to conserve my energy. I walk to the huddle. I don't run. I walk when the play is over. I don't go into the pile unless I have to. One of the main things at this point in my career is not to get hurt.'' Taylor's professed dropoff in enthusiasm may surprise opposing players whose main job is to keep him off the quarterback's back. It may surprise running backs who find Taylor flying across from the other side of the field and stopping them before they get past the line of scrimmage. Standards Are High His standards and his abilities are so high that his average performance may be better than someone else's best. Some football people have called him the best linebacker in history. Others have called him the best defensive player in history. ''I've done what I've wanted to do in this league,'' he said. ''I can say I've had a good career. But there are other things out there outside of football I'd like to try. Football is not going to be my whole life. I don't know what I want to do after football. I'll figure it out when I get there.''  PRO FOOTBALL
