757|1987\01\04|HOW ENTREPRENEURS CARVE OUT CAREERS IN UNEXPECTED FIELDS|AT the A & T Ironworks in New Rochelle, the president makes the coffee. ''I do what has to be done, even if it's only making coffee,'' said Gelsomina Tassone. ''I guess you could call my management style 'democratic.' Our 21 employees help one another. We don't have any prima donnas.'' A & T Ironworks, a manufacturer of ornamental wrought iron and structural steel, started out a dozen years ago as a one-man iron shop in a two-car garage on Union Street in New Rochelle.|AT the A & T Ironworks in New Rochelle, the president makes the coffee. ''I do what has to be done, even if it's only making coffee,'' said Gelsomina Tassone. ''I guess you could call my management style 'democratic.' Our 21 employees help one another. We don't have any prima donnas.'' A & T Ironworks, a manufacturer of ornamental wrought iron and structural steel, started out a dozen years ago as a one-man iron shop in a two-car garage on Union Street in New Rochelle. AT the A & T Ironworks in New Rochelle, the president makes the coffee. ''I do what has to be done, even if it's only making coffee,'' said Gelsomina Tassone. ''I guess you could call my management style 'democratic.' Our 21 employees help one another. We don't have any prima donnas.'' A & T Ironworks, a manufacturer of ornamental wrought iron and structural steel, started out a dozen years ago as a one-man iron shop in a two-car garage on Union Street in New Rochelle. The business grossed $20,000 a year in its first few years of operation. This year, Mrs. Tassone estimates that A & T sales will reach the $2 million mark. Mrs. Tassone's career illustrates how one woman has become successful in a non-traditional occupation. After a marriage ended, she held a series of part-time jobs while taking night courses at a nearby community college. ''I certainly didn't have any image of myself as an entrepreneur,'' she said, recalling the job she took as a bookkeeper/telephone answerer for Armando Tassone in his ironworks shop. ''I was so glad to be working at a full-time job that I didn't even mind commuting 120 miles a day to New Rochelle.'' At the time, she lived in Monroe in Orange County with her four daughters. ''I started learning as much as I could about ironwork as soon as I took the job,'' she said. ''I've always been interested in construction; my father was a craftsman who built marble altars for the Archdiocese of New York, and construction was always a topic we discussed.'' She moved to New Rochelle and two years later she married Mr. Tassone. She recalls that when she and Mr. Tassone first decided to expand the business, they did not think in terms of a financial plan. ''We didn't know any bankers, we just forged ahead using our personal savings,'' she said. ''At first Armando was doing all the work manually. It was hard. But when we began to grow and the time came to buy machinery and deal with suppliers in order to expand, I followed a pattern I use to this day. I went to suppliers directly in person and asked for 60 days. Then I paid them back in 45 days. That earned us a reputation as good payers and the word got around. We were able to get credit. I'm very up front with suppliers and they appreciate it.'' The year 1980 marked a turning point for the small company, said Mrs. Tassone, who is 42 years old. ''We bid on a job for the New York City Housing Authority to build 125 balconies for an apartment project in the South Bronx,'' she said. ''We got the contract for $92,000. I made a deal with the supplier, who agreed to settle for a deposit until we were paid by the Housing Authority. It was our first big job and a very big one for us. Since then we've been awarded many city contracts, in addition to those from hospitals, universities and corporations such as Con Edison, International Businss Machines, New York Telephone and Anheuser Busch. Mrs. Tassone said that a contract for $600,000 was not unusual and in order to handle the increased business, ''we bought out two other ironworks firms, Majestico Ironworks and G. Zaffino & Sons, both long-established, and we renovated the Zaffino building and incorporated the business of both.'' Mrs. Tassone, who taught herself to read blueprints and specifications, handles all the company's office work, bids on all the commercial and municipal jobs and monitors the approximately 200 job-projects the crews work on each month. She also buys all the machinery and equipment. ''It sounds like a lot of work,'' she said, ''and it is. But my husband and I work as a team. He's happiest in the field, so he works with customers on site, and he's also our chief estimator. It's a very good division of labor.'' Although she says she seldom has a problem dealing with male employees in a business dominated by men, Mrs. Tassone acknowledged that she sometimes has a hard time explaining her role to new customers. ''Once in awhile I get someone who refuses to believe I'm in charge,'' she said. ''No matter how hard I try to convince the caller that I was the person he wanted to talk to, he wouldn't listen, but kept saying, ''Please let me speak to someone who knows something.'' The considerable ''something'' that Mrs. Tassone knows has won her numerous awards from her peers. The Contractors Council of Greater New York named her Businesswoman of the Year last year. And last May A & T Tassone was a Westchester winner in a program honoring small businesses sponsored by the County Chamber of Commerce and the United States Small Business Administration. ''I work 12 hours a day six days a week,'' she said. ''And that's not counting the mailings and correspondence I catch up with at home. If that makes me a workoholic, that's O.K. with me. Work is what I enjoy doing the most. When I see some of our completed jobs, like the structural work we did under the Brooklyn Bridge, I feel really good.'' The Tassones live in the north end of New Rochelle. ''We've been asked every time when we expand if we're going to leave New Rochelle,'' said Mrs. Tassone. '' 'No way,' I answer. We've expanded and modernized our facility on Cliff Street several times. We now have 20,000 square feet. And recently we were able to buy the building across the street and it eventually will become our offices. We like New Rochelle.'' Mrs. Tassone's four daughters are grown now. All of them have had summer jobs at A & T. But their mother said that she would prefer that they get jobs at other companies before joining the family firm. ''I'd love to see my girls in the business, but frankly I thinks it's better to have worked for someone else first.'' In contrast to the Tassones' well-established company, the owners of Audio Antics in Bronxville have just begun to carve out a place for their business in a non-traditional field. Susan Winthrop and Nanci Hersh, the founders of Audio Antics, said they were aware that the recent strides made by women in unconventional businesses did not always bring salaries on a par with men. So they used their musical background to form a company that produces audio cassette tapes for musicians and commercials with original musical scores for radio and television spots. ''We were members of the same all-woman rock-and-roll band when we first met,'' said Ms. Hersh, who is an audio engineer. ''After the band broke up we began writing songs together and we tried to help actors and musicians we knew market themselves more effectively by designing labels for their tapes, doing location recordings for them and tape duplications. That's how the company started in Boston, where we were living at the time. Our first real break came when we recorded a concert of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology band.'' ''I used to play the clarinet and the bass clarinet in the M.I.T. Concert,'' said Ms. Winthrop, who is 31, ''and we offered to give the M.I.T. Concert Band a great quality recording, something they had never had before. It was a terrific success and once we had a master tape, we packaged it and sold copies to most of the players, and we were in business.'' The fledgling company's first two bank loans - one for a drum computer, the other for multi-track equipment - totaled $5,000. ''We got it from the Cambridge Trust Company,'' said Ms. Hersh, who is 32. ''We heard how difficult it was from other women entrepreneurs to get loans, but actually, honestly, it couldn't have been easier. Maybe we were just lucky, because we had a female loan officer who knew something about music and she encouraged us to enter what is still predominantly a man's field.'' When Audio Antics moved to the New York area last year it was to be closer to the center of the music world, Ms. Winthrop said. ''The center of the recording world is in New York City,'' she said, ''but since Nanci and I both grew up in Westchester - she's from Yonkers and I graduated from Edgemont High School in Scarsdale - we decided to settle in Westchester and we found an ideal place in Bronxville. The rents were lower in Westchester and we thought the area was safer, and since we work late hours recording it was an important consideration.'' Audio Antics' start-up costs -$20,000 - were financed privately, with the help of both women's families. ''Most of it was needed for construction, but we kept the costs very low because we did most of the work on the studio ourselves,'' said Ms. Hersh. ''Six months ago we were ready to open for business and we went out making cold calls.'' One of the first calls, to a local bank, produced results. ''They listened to our tapes and we quickly got a commission to write a musical signature for them - a 60-second instrumental with a voice over. They seemed very pleased with it,'' said Ms. Winthrop. Original music commercials and jingles generate 30 percent of the company's business; tape duplication, location recording, editing and retail tape sales make up the remainder. ''But location recording is proving very strong in this area,'' said Ms. Winthrop. ''We've picked up an amazing number of customers from music schools, including Juilliard as repeat clients.'' However, the recording industry, noted Ms. Hersh, is still predominantly male. ''As an audio engineer, I still encounter a certain amount of prejudice,'' she said. ''More than once, when I show up someone says, with what I can only describe as a sneer, 'Who's the sound guy?' ''
