758|1987\01\04|LAUTENBERG GETS TOXIC-WASTE ROLE|A NEW role - that of Toxic Avenger - has been taken on by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg in his capacity as head of the newly created Senate Superfund Oversight Subcommittee.|A NEW role - that of Toxic Avenger - has been taken on by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg in his capacity as head of the newly created Senate Superfund Oversight Subcommittee. A NEW role - that of Toxic Avenger - has been taken on by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg in his capacity as head of the newly created Senate Superfund Oversight Subcommittee. Environmentalists believe that the Senator, working with a fellow Democrat who wrote the original Superfund legislation in 1980 - Representative James J. Florio of the First Congressional District (parts of Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties) - will greatly improve conditions in New Jersey. ''It will help a lot,'' said Daniel Becker, legislative counsel for Environmental Action, a Washington-based lobby. ''That state is swimming in toxic waste.'' Mr. Lautenberg had asked that the watchdog subcommittee be created to assure compliance with the Superfund and other environmental programs. ''Now with a tighter law, coupled with my new position as chairman of the oversight subcommittee, we can be much more specific about what we ask the E.P.A.  [ he Federal Environmental Protection Agency ] ,'' Mr. Lautenberg said in an interview. ''We can look at the code and say, 'This is what you were supposed to do in this period of time. Have you done it? Why haven't you done it? Or, if you have done it, what are the results so far?' '' The junior Senator from New Jersey got involved with the Superfund about three years ago and was instrumental in revamping the original clManup law, which he billed as a ''sorry'' bit of legislation. The first Superfund package allotted $1.6 billion to the E.P.A. over five years for cleaning up the hundreds of dump sites on the National Priority List. Nationwide, only five sites were cleaned up, and the financing ran out in the fourth year. The poor cleanup record led Congress to write a tighter law that took up Representative Florio's credo of ''the polluter pays.'' The legislation also created an $8.5 billion war chest to be spent on cleanups for the next five years, and an additional $500 million was set aside to repair leaking underground storage tanks. Other than New Jersey, states with major waste problems include Texas, Louisiana and California. Mr. Lautenberg fought particularly hard to keep his ''Right to Know'' language in the bill because he believes people living near dump sites should be told what they are being poisoned by. Mr. Becker agrees that the legislation is a step in the right direction, but he believes the petrochemical industry may turn it into a ''Right to Worry'' law by using trade names to identify various chemical compounds and drowning concerned citizens in paperwork when they question the chemical companies. However, Mr. Lautenberg said he did not see this as a problem because the industry approved of the final legislation and helped to draft it. ''We don't want to pester them  [ chemical companies ]  to death,'' he said, ''and we don't want to make our chemical industry noncompetitive. But we believe our citizens in every community have a right to live without fear of pollution or contamination from a nearby industrial facility.'' Mr. Lautenberg and Mr. Florio said they would concentrate their energies on New Jersey's 97 Superfund sites. They are particularly interested in the Lipari Landfill in Gloucester County, named the nation's worst hazardous-waste site. Poisons from the landfill ooze into a nearby lake in which residents used to boat and bathe. Under the new Superfund law, municipalities contesting E.P.A. cleanup proposals can receive Federal funds to conduct their own investigations. ''We're actually going to provide money because citizens' groups don't have any money,'' Mr. Lautenberg said. ''To ask them to try to raise a treasury in confronting the Federal Government doesn't leave them with a level playing field.'' Both lawmakers said they looked forward to working together; however, some staff aides on Capitol Hill hinted that jealousies might grow if the two legislators started competing for attention. ''They could either build with each other and do something really good for New Jersey,'' one said, ''or they could compete with each other.'' Another aide said that Mr. Florio had the upper hand because his staff and Superfund filing system were in place, whereas Senator Lautenberg still had to develop his oversight office. Craig Deremer, the E.P.A.'s Congressional liaison, said that he expected to see Mr. Lautenberg ''a lot in the next two years.'' During the 99th Congress, the E.P.A. testified 144 times before 57 different committees and subcommittees, Mr. Deremer said. Most of the oversight queries begin in the House of Representatives, and Mr. Deremer said he expected that practice to remain the same.
