759|1987\01\04|NEEDED FOR THE NEW YEAR: BOLDNESS IN PROGRAMMING|Today is the last day of the New Year's weekend.|Today is the last day of the New Year's weekend. Today is the last day of the New Year's weekend. Tomorrow the newly refurbished Carnegie Recital Hall, now renamed the Weill Recital Hall, opens its doors. The coincidental proximity of these two events prompts a belated New Year's resolution, or better, wish, and one only partially related to Carnegie Hall and its smaller recital space. That wish is: Let the overseers of our midtown, mainstream classical-music concert life be suddenly inspired with a fresh boldness and daring, with an imagination and a verve that leads to greater risks but also greater rewards. Insofar as it lies within their power to do so, let them galvanize the tired blood of New York's concert life, which for all its superficial pulsing good health has grown dangerously moribund. How, you might ask, can one use the word moribund? More people than ever flock to New York concerts, and millions beyond them enjoy those concerts on radio, records and television. More and bigger are surely better. The response to this is that according to a surprising critical consensus, things are looking a little moldy around the edges in our glamorous concert halls and opera houses. Gonzo radicals from the avant-garde and rock left have long mocked classical music as dowdy and irrelevant. They can still be dismissed by classical-music lovers, secure in their pleasures and their pretensions to exclusive occupancy of the high-art pantheon. But now nearly every serious mainstream classical critic is complaining, too, from the neo-conservatives to those writing in the earnest left-leaning journals, from daily newspapers to weeklies to quarterlies. The complainers all agree: something has to be done to enliven our concert life. It's the analyses and the answers that still differ. Part of the problem lies with classical music in general. No longer producing important new works that excite both critics and public, challenged by serious attention to other musical styles, Western classical music worldwide has suffered a crisis of creative vitality. Some, neo-conservatives and gloomy Frankfurt School Marxists both, believe that capitalist democracy itself is at fault. For these pessimists, the very ''success'' of latter-day classical music - its dissemination to the masses and the resultant concentration on a dead core of ''masterpieces'' and a few gaudily hyped ''superstar'' performers - has stifled creative growth. Whatever the merit of such general broodings, the complaints about New York's concert life relate specifically to the conservatism and timidity of New York's own presenters. Touring orchestras, chamber ensembles and recitalists are too often requested by their New York hosts to modify their programs toward timidity - to remove that nervous-making Dutilleux symphony that they have played in Indianapolis and Rochester and replace it with the Brahms Violin Concerto, say with Pinchas Zukerman as soloist. A couple of years ago, Christopher Hogwood's Academy of Ancient Music, riding the crest of its record-sales success, was asked to replace arias by the soprano Emma Kirkby with ''The Water Music,'' for fear that Ms. Kirkby wouldn't sell enough tickets. The intention here is not to point fingers at individual targets. Nor is it to replace well-loved masterpieces with abrasive, unpleasant avant-garde music. No one is concentrating sole blame on some cabal of concert managers on 57th Street ordering Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center and the mighty Metropolitan Opera to ignore bright young talents and potentially popular musical revivals in favor of the same old artists in the same old repertory. But whatever the analysis of its cause and the alternatives offered for its solution, there can be no doubt that the problem is real. Fortunately, there are also enough laudable examples of creative programming around town to provide inspirational models to anyone who wishes to be inspired. Harvey Lichtenstein with his Next Wave Festival has proven that actual new music and dance and theater can draw bustling crowds - to Brooklyn, no less. Omus Hirshbein has attracted ample audiences and generous funding for surprisingly varied and interesting programs all the way uptown at the 92d Street Y. Allan Miller has accomplished something even bolder (albeit more occasionally) at the run-down Symphony Space on Broadway at 95th Street. Midtown, circumstances and success rates of course vary. The jury is still out on Carnegie Hall, although officials there at least talk as if they recognize a need for programming improvement, especially at the Recital Hall, which has too often been a mere forum for vanity debut recitals of highly variable quality (vanity meaning paid for by the artist or his sponsors but unlikely to lead to any sort of significant career). Still, the apparent retreat from the ambitious plans of Seymour Rosen, the former managing director, is a cause for concern. Mr. Rosen pioneered regular concert opera at the hall, spiffy reconstructions of classic musicals and honorably intended series of jazz and avant-garde music. Many of those events were underattended or overexpensive, but they pointed toward a valuable and potentially popular role for midtown halls in the high-minded presentation of noncommercial vernacular music. Town Hall is still mired in indirection. Merkin Hall on West 67th Street, smaller and less expensive to rent than the nearby Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center, has attracted events from both Tully and the Carnegie/Weill Recital Hall, but has established no really clear identity of its own. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, moving into the 20th century in the visual arts, offers blue-chip classical-music conservatism plus a nice dollop of early music on its concert series. Which leaves Lincoln Center. The Metropolitan Opera House is given over to the Met itself and to rental attractions, mostly ballet companies. The Met has its own problems of intense, deadening conservatism in its repertory, production styles and casting, but that is a subject often lamented in these pages. At the New York State Theater, the New York City Opera shares time with the City Ballet. The City Opera is trying laudably and even successfully to shape an image for itself, and has boldly explored Broadway and quirky corners of the repertory. Not all these explorations have been carried out with the optimum taste or refinement, but at least the quest for the unusual is there. The Vivian Beaumont and Mitzi E. Newhouse Theaters have had their own troubles, but they weren't related to music. Thus, Tully Hall and Avery Fisher Hall remain the two spaces in which Lincoln Center itself can present its own programming, under its Great Performers rubric. Both halls are devoted to other functions, as well: At Fisher Hall, the New York Philharmonic carries on its own rather insular struggle (given a subscription base seemingly impervious to questions of artistic quality) to escape the crushing ordinary. Tully Hall is still given over regularly to rentals of every sort. Lincoln Center has a history of programming innovation. In its early years, when the composer William Schuman was running the show, all manner of bold initiatives took place, but they lost more money than the board felt comfortable raising. The summer Mostly Mozart Festival, even though it has since sunken into formula only barely varied in recent years, was an innovative step when it was new. More recently there have been token vanguard events, mostly borrowings from Mr. Lichtenstein's Next Wave roster of the Philip Glass-Robert Wilson variety. But on the whole, Lincoln Center could most definitely use some bracing new ideas (symbolically, it could also use some basic maintenance, especially when compared with the spanking new Carnegie Hall: paint is peeling off the Tully Hall ceiling, the lights in both Tully and Fisher Halls still emit high-pitched whines, etc.). Staring at the center's annual season advertisements (both those of the constituents, for the most part, and most definitely of the center's own Great Performers series) is to be confronted with the current nadir of conservative programming in New York. Critics, it should be remembered, have no money of their own to lose in advocating such boldness; if the theaters are empty, they can just shrug their shoulders and move on to the next column. Critics also have a vested interest in the unusual, given their constant exposure to the usual. But the point here is that imagination should not be pursued out of Quixotic idealism; handled correctly, it should increase ticket sales, not diminish them. Of course, the serious performing arts lose money, so funds would have to be raised to offset losses. Of course, no one should charge wildly ahead of the tastes of the audience, risking empty theaters for connoisseurs' fancies. But impresarios can, should and (in some already living, breathing cases) do lead, not just follow. Clearly - to judge from Mr. Lichtenstein's and Mr. Hirshbein's success - the New York audience would eagerly support more varied high-quality offerings than it now receives. The success of unusual repertory on mainstream classical record labels proves that. Certainly, any such ventures should be greeted supportively by the very critics now complaining about the staleness of our concert life. Ultimately, we all want our concert life to be as vital as possible, and vitality can (isn't always or invariably, but can) be expressed in terms of ticket sales as well as critical approbation. If the public is excited by something - an artist, a new composer, a stage director, a concert series - it will turn up at the box office. The right kind of boldness, imaginatively conceived, presented and promoted, pays - in dollars, not just in press clippings. In short, as a new year dawns and a new hall opens, Manhattan is poised and waiting for a few vital, commanding impresarios to move in here and show us how it should be done. All they need is to be given - or to seize -the opportunity. MUSIC VIEW
