761|1987\01\04|CONSTITUTION AT 200: POMP AND PONDERING|With the first strokes of 1987, Philadelphia and the nation have touched off not only a yearlong celebration of the Constitution's 200th anniversary but also what promises to become the most broadly based examination of the American political system since the Founding Fathers met here in 1787 to fashion the country's basic charter.|With the first strokes of 1987, Philadelphia and the nation have touched off not only a yearlong celebration of the Constitution's 200th anniversary but also what promises to become the most broadly based examination of the American political system since the Founding Fathers met here in 1787 to fashion the country's basic charter. With the first strokes of 1987, Philadelphia and the nation have touched off not only a yearlong celebration of the Constitution's 200th anniversary but also what promises to become the most broadly based examination of the American political system since the Founding Fathers met here in 1787 to fashion the country's basic charter. On New Year's Eve thousands of chilled but high-spirited Philadelphians gathered at Penn's Landing on the Delaware River for the official kickoff, a midnight light show and fireworks display. A flood of such pageantry is in prospect here and around the country in 1987, from humble tree-plantings to what Philadelphia is billing as the biggest parade in the nation's history, and from urban street festivals to rural quilting bees to concerts and television extravaganzas. But this bicentennial also bids to become a far more serious and thoughtful observance than the 200th anniversary of independence in 1976 and the Statue of Liberty's centennial in 1986. In fact, scholars say a rare exercise in national self-examination appears to lie just ahead. There are widespread hopes that people at many levels, from high school classrooms to blue-ribbon groups of intellectuals and politicians, will take part. Partly this is because an unusual array of constitutional stresses and strains have engaged the country's attention. Not least among them are issues brought to the fore by the Iran arms affair, issues that some experts say cut to the heart of the workings of the constitutional system. The Reagan Administration's secret arms sales to Iran and diversion of proceeds to Nicaraguan rebels have provoked apprehension about abuses of Presidential power. The affair has focused attention on the system's capacity for self-correction. And it has threatened serious damage to yet another Presidency after four consecutive failed, crippled or truncated Presidencies. Do these failures indicate a serious flaw in a system that has generally served well for 200 years? Such questions are being raised by political scientists, constitutional scholars, historians and politicians. Some wonder whether the Constitution itself, for all its flexibility and strength and its historic significance for the world, is fully up to the demands of the modern era. Can foreign or domestic policy be made and administered effectively as things stand? Are repairs and modifications called for? These concerns go beyond the issues of judicial interpretation and civil rights that have frequently dominated discussion about the Constitution in recent decades. Of Relevance and Usefulness ''The basic question facing those of us who want a serious commemoration of the Constitution is about the relevance and usefulness of the Constitution for the next 200 years,'' said James MacGregor Burns, of Williams College, the political scientist. Professor Burns is a co-chairman of Project 87, a coalition of historians and political scientists devoted to such a commemoration. As part of its work, the group is to hold a forum on constitutional issues here on May 24, the eve of the 200th anniversary of the Constitutional Convention's first meeting. Constitutional scholars believe the convergence of all this concern in a spotlight like that of the bicentennial presents an unmatched opportunity for illumination and public education. The elaborately planned celebrations of the bicentennial are to reach a high point in Philadelphia in May, maintain that level through the summer and then crest on Sept. 17, the anniversary of the Constitution's signing. But observances are to continue well beyond that. New York, for example, will have its celebration in 1988, the anniversary of its reluctant acceptance of the Constitution, and 1989, the bicentennial of Washington's inauguration as President and the convening of the First Congress. Both the celebratory and ''cerebratory'' aspects, as they have come to be called by many of those involved, are to extend at least until the bicentennial period officially ends in 1991 with the 200th anniversary of the adoption of the Bill of Rights. The Search for 'Big Bucks' Education is becoming the main thrust of the Commission on the Bicentennial of the United States Constitution. This group, headed by Warren E. Burger, retired Chief Justice of the United States, is official coordinator of the observances. But many activities outside the reach of the official commission are likely to be highly commercial. ''I can categorically say that there are organizations and individuals out there who see the bicentennial as lucrative and who have already begun hustling to see what kind of big bucks can be made,'' said Michael Kammen, a Cornell University historian whose 1986 book, ''A Machine That Would Go of Itself,'' is an examination of Americans' attitudes toward the Constitution. Of course, he said, nothing could be more American than the drive to capitalize. Nor are fireworks, parades and festivals to be neglected. ''Without those things, this celebration will be a failure,'' said Fred M. Stein, program planner for Philadelphia's large slice of the observance. ''With just the serious, intellectual side, we will not garner the interest or support from the American public. There must be a balance.'' An Exercise in Icon Worship A hundred years ago, in the absence of any compelling public concern or controversy over the Constitution, the celebration of its centennial year became essentially an exercise in icon worship. ''What we got was a ritualistic, pro forma celebration,'' said Dr. Kammen, ''in which the American people said, 'Ho, hum, this is a bore.' '' In 1937, the year of the Constitution's sesquicentennial, the celebration was ''anything but a pro forma ritual,'' Dr. Kammen said. President Roosevelt announced his ultimately unsuccessful plan to enlarge the Supreme Court in February that year; as a result, said Dr. Kammen, ''the people were incredibly agitated and therefore alert and interested'' in both the Constitution and the sesquicentennial. Today, Dr. Kammen and other authorities say, a far broader range of provocative questions have converged and aroused public interest. Academic specialists on the Constitution, for example, say they have been overwhelmed with requests for appearances. ''I've had at least 200 and maybe 300 invitations to do things relating to the Constitution,'' said Laurence Tribe, a constitutional scholar at Harvard University. ''Rather than having to get people up to speed and generate interest in the subject, I find the stage is set.'' Events of the last year are responsible for this, the experts say. Before the disclosures about the Iran arms affair, attention had been focused on constitutional concerns through the confirmation hearings of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court. And Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d's pronouncements on the Constitution focused it even more sharply. Reopening Questions Over the last few months Mr. Meese has provoked many scholars and politicians by urging that constitutional issues be guided solely by the framers' original intent; by raising the question of whether the central government has rendered the states too weak; by questioning whether Supreme Court decisions really constitute the law of the land, and especially by questioning whether the Bill of Rights should apply to the states. ''I happen to disagree with most of the positions he's taken,'' Dr. Kammen said. ''I happen to believe he's operating from ideological stimuli and that he is committing all sorts of constitutional sins in the name of democracy. Nevertheless, I couldn't be more pleased that he has reopened just about every constitutional question imaginable.'' The bicentennial itself had already prompted systematic efforts to explore the Constitution and its effectiveness. Chief among these efforts, perhaps, is that of the Washington-based Committee on the Constitutional System, a nonpartisan group of scholars, politicians, educators, lawyers, labor officials and business leaders. The group has been exploring a number of questions: Has the separation of powers now produced a Government so divided and incohesive that, for example, deficits cannot be reduced? Has the ability to devise and administer a coherent public policy diminished? Does a series of damaged Presidencies show that something is structurally wrong? 'Just Too Difficult to Manage' ''We suggest that it does indicate a flaw in the system,'' said Lloyd N. Cutler, former counsel to President Carter, who is one of three co-chairmen of the committee. The others are Douglas Dillon, a former Treasury Secretary and Under Secretary of State, and Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas. Professor Burns is one of the committee's many directors. ''It's not that we have chosen poor leaders,'' Mr. Cutler said. ''The system is just too difficult to manage.'' ''Goodness knows,'' he said, ''it has many, many virtues. But it no longer has to just protect the coast and run the post office. It now has to manage a world economy and prevent nuclear war. And it's too big. Nobody's figured out how to run anything this big.'' Some scholars also question whether the system, in Professor Burns's words, ''inhibits Presidents from doing good things as well as bad things.'' He suggested Presidents were under pressure to get things done ''because of the tremendous political and media emphasis on action.'' So, he said, ''Along comes a Nixon in the 70's, or, we can say today, a national security group under Reagan, who smashes through the historic checks and balances and threatens the constitutional system in the ways we're familiar with.'' Professor Burns says ''practically no one'' thinks that a drastic change of the kind that took place in 1787 is now necessary. But many believe that modifications may be. The Committee on the Constitutional System, for example, is thinking along the lines of readjusting and expanding the terms of members of Congress so as to promote coherence and stability in policymaking. As in 1787, when the Constitutional Convention met to revise the Articles of Confederation, substantial disagreement as to the extent and advisability of changes appears in store. ''We're hoping that there will be hearings in both houses of Congress about the political structure,'' Mr. Cutler said. The committee's report is due within the next month, and the committee plans to meet in Philadelphia around Sept. 17, Constitution Day, to discuss the report's findings and proposals in a national town meeting. Constitutional amendments may be proposed by Congress or by a convention called on application of two-thirds of the state legislatures. An amendment requires the approval of three-fourths of the state legislatures. Although much ferment and discussion about possible amendments seem likely, no structural changes have yet been formally proposed. Imagine the Founding Fathers What would the Founding Fathers think of the system today? It is another question sure to be asked in the months ahead. ''I think they would be amazed and dismayed by the extent of Presidential power,'' said Dr. Burns, who is an authority on the Presidency. ''And the idea that the courts would have the kind of creative policy-making power that the judiciary has taken on would have amazed them'' also. But, Dr. Kammen said, ''The change that would shock them the most is the disequilibrium that has occurred in federalism. The pendulum has swung very, very far to the national extreme.'' Originally, he speculated, ''They would have said this wouldn't have worked out.'' But they would probably accept it now, he said, ''if they could have an extensive briefing session with historians and political scientists and prominent journalists and politicians and understood what kind of social, economic and technological transformations have occurred.''  A PHILADELPHIA DATEBOOK Although Constitution bicentennial observances are planned around the country, Philadelphia will be the focal point of the national celebration. Following are some of the hundreds of events and exhibits scheduled in Philadelphia in 1987, with addresses where appropriate. JANUARY 4. The country's oldest black church, the Mother Bethel A.M.E. Church, begins yearlong celebration of its and the Constitution's 200th anniversary. 419 South Sixth Street.  8-10. Philadelphia Orchestra presents first of six works commissioned for bicentennial, ''Phaeton,'' a concert overture by Christopher Rouse. Others periodically through December. Academy of Music.  9 and continuing.  ''Born Out of Time,'' sound and light show on the contributions of Benjamin Franklin. Franklin Institute. MARCH  8-15.  ''Tea at Gray's Ferry,'' Philadelphia Flower Show recreation of oasis George Washington frequented during Constitutional Convention. Civic Center. 15-17.  Conference on state consitutional law, sponsored by Temple University Center for the Study of Federalism, at Hershey Hotel. APRIL 4-8.  Antique show featuring exhibit of objects made by tradesmen circa 1787. Armory. MAY May 1 through December.  A Magna Carta, the last and most inclusive version of the English charter that was a precursor of the Constitution, on display at Old City Hall. British royalty expected to attend opening. 1-17.  Philadelphia Open House. Tours of private homes, gardens and historic buildings, sponsored by Friends of Independence National Historical Park. 13.  Re-enactment of George Washington's arrival for the Constitutional Convention, from Chester, Pa., to Old City, Philadelphia. 22.  ''Born in America,'' popular music concert celebrating diversity of American music, Ben Franklin Parkway. 23-24.  ''1787 Festival,'' re-creation of life 200 years ago, Independence Mall. 24.  Governors of 13 original states gather to examine the ''state of the states.'' 25.  ''The Convention Begins,'' ceremonial commemoration of the first meeting of the Constitutional Convention. 28-30.  Philadelphia Dance Company, special performances. Annenberg Center. JULY 1-5.  Constitution Relays, track and field competition for youths from 38 states, Franklin Field. 16.  Special session of United States Congress, the first in Philadelphia since 1800, at Independence Mall. Limited public participation. 19-25.  Global Perspectives on Women and the Constitution, with delegates from throughout the world, at University of Pennsylvania. SEPTEMBER 15.  Interfaith candlelight service on Independence Mall commemorating the signing of the Constitution and its guarantees of religious freedom. 17.  Constitution Day, with daylong activities including a huge parade in Philadelphia and simultaneous ''satellite'' parades in other cities.  (Some dates may be subject to change. For further information, write: ''We the People 200,'' Bourse Building, Suite 565, Independence Mall East, Philadelphia, PA 19106.)
