762|1987\01\04|STABBING SUSPECT CALLED 'QUIET MAN'|The man arrested in the stabbing of a popular Chinese actor was described yesterday by employees of a mission where he lived as a ''quiet man'' who had never shown ''any sign of a violent nature.''|The man arrested in the stabbing of a popular Chinese actor was described yesterday by employees of a mission where he lived as a ''quiet man'' who had never shown ''any sign of a violent nature.'' The man arrested in the stabbing of a popular Chinese actor was described yesterday by employees of a mission where he lived as a ''quiet man'' who had never shown ''any sign of a violent nature.'' The man, Rene Cordova, 41 years old, was arrested Thursday night and charged with first-degree assault in an attack on a 70-year-old Chinese performer, Chiang Kuang-Chao, on the stage of the Town Hall theater in Manhattan. Though no one at the McAuley Water Street Mission, a private, nondenominational shelter at 90 Lafayette Street, knew much about Mr. Cordova, employees said they believed he was employed in midtown Manhattan by a Korean restaurant and liquor store. ''He was a quiet guy who went about his own business,'' said one mission staff member, who refused to be identified. ''Everybody here is amazed that he was involved in something like this.'' 'Chinese Bob Hope' The stabbing, before 1,200 theatregoers, has outraged the Chinese-American community in New York. Mr. Chiang, who has been called the ''Chinese Bob Hope.'' was in satisfactory condition at St. Clare's Hospital yesterday. For about two weeks before the stabbing, Mr. Cordova stayed at the mission, according to staff members of the mission, who asked not to be identified. From 1980 to 1982, however, he resided at the mission, working in the group's maintenance department in return for food and shelter, the staff members said. According to witnesses and the police, Mr. Chiang, dressed at the time in a black tuxedo, was stabbed in the chest by a man who walked onto the stage as the cast of 14 actors was about to sing the finale, ''Tomorrow Will Be Even Better,'' at a benefit variety show.
