763|1987\01\04|WOMEN'S ACHIEVEMENTS HONORED|A trickle of stamps honoring women has turned into a steady stream befitting their emerging role in society and the history of nations. Last year, United States issues honored black human rights advocate Sojourner Truth and women's rights activist Belva Ann Lockwood. A more traditional role was depicted on a Big Brothers/Big|A trickle of stamps honoring women has turned into a steady stream befitting their emerging role in society and the history of nations. Last year, United States issues honored black human rights advocate Sojourner Truth and women's rights activist Belva Ann Lockwood. A more traditional role was depicted on a Big Brothers/Big A trickle of stamps honoring women has turned into a steady stream befitting their emerging role in society and the history of nations. Last year, United States issues honored black human rights advocate Sojourner Truth and women's rights activist Belva Ann Lockwood. A more traditional role was depicted on a Big Brothers/Big Sisters stamp released in 1985. Other countries have followed similar patterns. The most recent is from the Federal Republic of Germany. That nation has announced a permanent series that ''pays tribute to significant achievements made by women in all political, scientific and cultural fields throughout German history.'' The first two subjects were released Nov. 13. One honors Christine Teusch, who lived from 1888 to 1968. The Christian Democratic Party politician was responsible for social, women's and cultural affairs. As Minister of Education and Cultural Affairs of North-Rhine/Westphalia in 1947, she was the first woman to become a Minister in the Federal Republic of Germany. The second stamp in the new series depicts Clara Schumann, who lived from 1819 to 1896. She is considered one of the most important pianists of the 19th century. In 1840 she married the German composer Robert Schumann. Ireland also honored ''Women in Society'' last year with a symbolic design that reflects the changing role and aspirations of women in Irish society. The design illustrates a woman surveyor. It was chosen to encourage increased female participation in the technological, engineering and industrial sciences as part of ''Women in Engineering in Ireland Year.'' With few exceptions, the nations of the world are now willing to philatelically recognize the achievement of their women. As a result, the once-popular ''women on stamps'' collecting topic will have to be sub-divided into authors, human rights activists or similar categories for a hobbyist to build a complete collection. The Pictorials The 1869 issue included the first postage stamps from the United States Post Office that feature designs other than the heads of famous Americans. For this reason, the set is known as the 1869 pictorials. The denominations and designs in the set are: 1/ head of Benjamin Franklin; 2/ post horse and rider; 3/ locomotive; 5/ head of George Washington; 10/ eagle and shield; 12/ ocean steamship; 15/ landing of Christopher Columbus; 24/ signing of the Declaration of Independence; 30/ eagle, shield and flags, and 90/ head of Abraham Lincoln. Except for the 15/ issue, there are no significant design types among the 1869 pictorials. The 15/ has three varieties. Collectors considering the purchase of any 15/ 1869 pictorials should be aware of these varieties. They are described as Types I, II and III. Type III can be identified by the lack of shading lines around the vignette or central design. This seemingly trivial point is important because fakers have been known to shave and regum the less valuable proofs to pass them off as valuable re-issues or even as dangerous fakes of the rare ungrilled varieties of the 1869 issue. Obtaining independent advice is suggested for all but the most expert collector. Some of the 1869 pictorials are found with and without grills. These grills were applied to prevent removal of cancellations and reuse of stamps for postage. The 1869 issue is usually seen with grills, while the 1875 and 1880 re-issues do not have grills. There are, however, extremely rare genuine examples of the 1869 issue without grill and not-so-rare examples with faint or pressed-out grills. The identification problem caused by the ironing out of grills is of such dimension that cataloguers and expertizers recognize the no-grill varieties only with original gum. Beyond these few technical factors, the 1869 issue offers a touch of nostalgia and the high values were America's first multi-colored issues. As with virtually all early United States multi-color issues, the need for two printing passes resulted in the issuance of inverted center errors. Usages of the 1869 issue also are very collectable. Cancellations, destinations, early usages and other variations have become the basis for award-winning collections. The 1875 re-issues genuinely used on cover are extremely rare. One of the hobby's more active specialty groups is devoted to this series. The U.S. 1869 Pictorial Research Associates includes in its activities publications of journals and books on the different denominations. For further information on the 1869 pictorials and this society, collectors can contact Victor B. Krievins, Box 84, Glenside, Pa. 19038. The Philatelic Foundation and the Collectors Club of New York will conduct a roundtable discussion on the re-issues of the 1869 pictorials on Jan. 21 from 4 P.M. to 6 P.M. at the Collectors Club, 22 East 35th Street. Elliot Coulter, an authority on the 1869 pictorials, will lead the group discussion, which is open to adult collectors. Auction Ethics The American Stamp Dealers' Association has announced that auctioneer members of the organization have endorsed an A.S.D.A. Code of Ethics for auction firms. Jacques C. Schiff, Jr. of Ridgefield Park, N.Y., is chairman of the committee. As part of the dealer group's consumer protection program, the auctioneer's code of ethics requires all qualified public auction firms to have proper licensing and adequate insurance. Full disclosure of terms of sale, auction and viewing dates and times, prices realized and consignment terms also are required. The rights of buyers to return misdescribed lots and to seek authentication of the printed descriptions also are assured. A.S.D.A. members who ascribe to the code will be able to use the title ''Qualified Auctioneer'' beneath the A.S.D.A.logo in advertisements and auction catalogues. A complete list of these ''Qualified Auctioneers'' can be obtained by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope to the American Stamp Dealers' Association, 5 Dakota Drive, Lake Success, N.Y. 11042. From Sweden Recent issues from Sweden honor sports achievements of its citizens and promote world peace and freedom. The Scandinavian nation's only 1986 minisheet featured track and field athletes. Ann-Louise Skoglund is shown on her way to victory in the 400 meter hurdles race in the 1982 European Championships. Dan Wennlund, a world-class javelin thrower, is shown with Eric Lemming, an Olympic medal winner at the turn of the century. Another Olympic medalist seen in the set is Anders Garderud, who once held the world record for the 3,000 meter steeplechase. Patrik Sjoberg, rated as the best high jumper in the world in 1985, appears on the final stamp in the new set. Sweden's entry in the 1986 International Year of Peace omnibus issue also honors Amnesty International. One stamp in the coil pair shows a chain being torn asunder by shackled hands. A flame representing hope burns in the background. The other stamp illustrates an olive branch sweeping away weapons in a quest for peace on earth. STAMPS
