764|1987\01\04|BRONCOS AND PATRIOTS: THROW PLAYOFF KEYS OU THE WINDOW|Tony Eason is healthy again and there have not been any physical problems regarding the big and rugged John Elway. So the quarterbacks, Eason for the Patriots and Elway for the Broncos, are ready for Sunday's playoff game here between New England and Denver. The winner meets the Jets or the Cleveland Browns next Sunday in the American|Tony Eason is healthy again and there have not been any physical problems regarding the big and rugged John Elway. So the quarterbacks, Eason for the Patriots and Elway for the Broncos, are ready for Sunday's playoff game here between New England and Denver. The winner meets the Jets or the Cleveland Browns next Sunday in the American Tony Eason is healthy again and there have not been any physical problems regarding the big and rugged John Elway. So the quarterbacks, Eason for the Patriots and Elway for the Broncos, are ready for Sunday's playoff game here between New England and Denver. The winner meets the Jets or the Cleveland Browns next Sunday in the American Conference final. The Patriots' other quarterback, the veteran Steve Grogan, is ready too, but no one knows what role he may play. He will, however, select the plays from the sidelines for New England and relay them to Eason, as usual. It is the parts beyond the quarterbacks of these teams that remain mysterious, such as the defenses and the running attacks. Playoff Keys The elements that count the most in playoff games have historically been strong defenses, reliance on running games, and the homefield advantage. The Broncos and the Patriots have lacked the first two lately and the third may be unimportant. Denver, the Western Division champion for the second time in the last three seasons, had an 11-5 record in the regular season as did New England. But the Broncos lost two of three games in December and their defense gave up 136 points in the last four contests, an average of 34 a game. New England, chasing the Jets most of the campaign, won the Eastern Division title by defeating Miami, 34-27, in the Monday-night match that ended the regular season. The Patriots had lost twice before that game and their defense, somewhat injured, gave up 107 points in its last four games. As for running with the football, the Broncos averaged 3.7 yards per attempt, the Patriots 2.9 over 16 games. The league rankings said Denver was 20th, New England 28th or last. Almost two-thirds of the playoff games in the National Football League since 1970, when the present structure began, have been won by the home team. The Broncos, on the grass in Mile High Stadium with a crowd of 75,000 always present, have sustained that mark in recent seasons and this year they were 7-1 here. But the Patriots, who do not care where they play, won three playoff road games on their way to the Super Bowl last season and were 7-1 on the road this season. The defeat was to the Broncos, 27-20, Sept. 28. The Patriots spent the last six days at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, where Eason proved the pinched nerve in his right shoulder had healed. Something Extra He is their starting quarterback and Grogan, 33 years old, accepts that. But New England has something extra in Grogan, who did such a remarkable job in winning the last game from Miami by passing for two touchdowns and running for a third after Eason was injured. The Broncos, in their finale, were routed by Seattle, 41-16, a result that dismayed their coach, Dan Reeves. The strategy planned by both coaches is expected to be the same. The aim will be to try to take some command early by running, but neither team has Pro Bowl choices in its backfield or anyone close to 1,000-yard runner. If such running strategy fails, the game will go back to the passers. The best receiver on the field will be Stanley Morgan of the Patriots and Denver has no one quite like him. The Broncos' top receiver lately has been Mark Jackson, a rookie, rather than the veteran Steve Watson. Linebackers' performances will be the key to the defenses and each side has big-play players, Andre Tippett and Johnny Rembert for New England, Karl Mecklenburg and Ricky Hunley for Denver. Mecklenburg is a Lawrence Taylor type in that he lines up in different places and causes havoc regardless. Kickers are important in playoffs, too. New England's barefoot Tony Franklin is a Pro Bowl nominee and Rich Camarillo, the punter, has been among the best for several seasons. Denver's Rich Karlis had a good year and the punter, Mike Horan, is the third employed this season. The edge is New England's and a small one. Otherwise, there are no edges for either side.
