765|1987\01\04|Some Glasnost Is Better Than None|Just as Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan ran for President by running against Washington, so Mikhail Gorbachev seems to seek far-reaching changes by attacking the Soviet bureaucracy. He told a writers' group in June that between the people and the leadership who want change ''there is a layer of officialdom - an apparat of ministries, a party apparat - that does not want changes and does not want to lose some rights associated with privileges.|Just as Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan ran for President by running against Washington, so Mikhail Gorbachev seems to seek far-reaching changes by attacking the Soviet bureaucracy. He told a writers' group in June that between the people and the leadership who want change ''there is a layer of officialdom - an apparat of ministries, a party apparat - that does not want changes and does not want to lose some rights associated with privileges. Just as Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan ran for President by running against Washington, so Mikhail Gorbachev seems to seek far-reaching changes by attacking the Soviet bureaucracy. He told a writers' group in June that between the people and the leadership who want change ''there is a layer of officialdom - an apparat of ministries, a party apparat - that does not want changes and does not want to lose some rights associated with privileges.'' Now, his public rehabilitation of Andrei Sakharov sends an even sharper message. Mr. Gorbachev's new glasnost, openness, has brought dramatic changes. Considering how long and how tightly Soviet society has been closed, it's tempting to stretch the possibilities. The very word has become almost a cliche for Western hopes. But glasnost means two things. It is a club handed by Mr. Gorbachev to Russian intellectuals to beat economic efficiency out of the bureaucracy. It is a gate through which some wrongly imprisoned dissidents can be released and some long-silenced voices can be heard. There's no contradiction between seeing glasnost as a limited opening that could be cruelly closed as Politburo interests require, and embracing it for what it also is, a breath of humanity. Nor should the West hesitate to welcome glasnost in the short run for fear it will strengthen the Soviet Union in the long run. A freer Russia might be a more formidable adversary, but it would also be a worthier one. For the West, the foreign policy implications are tricky. Attempts to seize on the new policy to try to humiliate Mr. Gorbachev would surely force him into tough reactions. Attempts at positive reinforcement, in the form of trade and arms control, are not likely to foster even more openness or a more moderate Soviet foreign policy. Such thinking misconstrues the roots and goals of glasnost. Mr. Gorbachev's underlying goal is not to install Western-style democracy, but to strengthen his rule and his country. Easing up on dissidents improves the Soviet image abroad, reinforces foreign policy aims and helps open channels to Western technology. It might also chip away at the traditionalism and immobility that drag down the Soviet economy, a phenomenon well described by Serge Schmemann in The Times as he concludes his tour as bureau chief in Moscow. Mr. Gorbachev's version of openness falls short of Nikita Khrushchev's, although he seems to be moving faster. Mr. Khrushchev not only freed dissidents but he apologized to them. His public attacks were aimed not only at vague ''officialdom,'' but also at the K.G.B. Still, the Khrushchev internal reforms were accompanied by an aggressive foreign policy. Thus far, the Gorbachev era has been marked by a greater care at home and abroad. It's a blessing that Andrei Sakharov is back in Moscow and speaking his mind. That other dissidents may be released would be a further blessing. That some glasnost exists is better than none. How much will there be? Mr. Gorbachev himself probably does not yet know how far he will go to shake his countrymen from decades and more of lethargy and cynicism. But two things can be counted on. He will not, when pressed, sacrifice political control for greater economic efficiency. He will not be much swayed in his internal course by Western rewards. Trade and arms control can maintain a good climate; the West should pursue both on their own terms. Above all, the West would do well to understand the self-interest from which glasnost springs even while welcoming the humanity it brings.
