766|1987\01\04|Franklin Delano Cuomo|In the address inaugurating his second term as New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo had little to say that applies only to New York and much that applies to the United States.|In the address inaugurating his second term as New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo had little to say that applies only to New York and much that applies to the United States. In the address inaugurating his second term as New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo had little to say that applies only to New York and much that applies to the United States. His ''New York idea'' includes the promise of a government faithful to both heart and head. He continues to embrace the idea of the state as an extended family. And he pays oratorical homage to Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the last governor of New York to become President. Whether or not Mr. Cuomo runs for President in 1988, he's boldly claiming for himself the whole traditional, liberal side of the Democratic spectrum, territory from which other Democrats seem to shrink. Rescuing Roosevelt from the right will be a complex task. Democrats of the Reagan era repeatedly sound like Republicans, complaining prudently about the President's ruinous policy of borrow and spend, borrow and spend. The President, meanwhile, repeatedly declares himself to be the bearer of Roosevelt's torch. He claims affinity with New Deal efforts to erase the fears of poverty and old age. He argues, as did Roosevelt, that a strong defense is the best shield against war. Potential Democratic candidates have sought to chart an honest cure for the vast Reagan deficits. Without asking for higher taxes, they have suggested that the country cut back its spending. They talk of reconstructing the economy to bring higher productivity at lower cost. Governor Cuomo's inaugural address traces a different road map. Like Franklin Roosevelt running against the right, he will stand for no watering down of the American promise to those who cannot manage for themselves. Like Ronald Reagan running against Jimmy Carter, he will stand for no pessimistic surrender to a politics of less. He asserts his faith that the bounteous American dream is rosier than ever. He promises a government shrewd enough to provide guns and butter, and compassionate enough both to mend the safety net and reduce taxes. To show that these promises can be met, Governor Cuomo points to New York, where in the last four years employment is up, taxes are down, and the state debt has hardly changed. Some will argue that the improvement in the state's economic position derives from Reagan policies. That claim needs to be assessed against the immensity of the Reagan deficits and the state's prosperity. If Mario Cuomo chooses to link his own national prospects to the well-being of the state, it's a choice all New Yorkers can welcome, whatever their preference for 1988.
