767|1987\01\04|Topics: Star Turns; Dim Sun|The sun, scientists tell us, is in trouble. The amount of radiation it sends down to Earth has been decreasing noticeably, about one-tenth of 1 percent over five years. If this were to continue, all the Earth might freeze. But, the scientists quickly add, this situation may be only temporary and there is no need to worry about it for a while - a million years or so.|The sun, scientists tell us, is in trouble. The amount of radiation it sends down to Earth has been decreasing noticeably, about one-tenth of 1 percent over five years. If this were to continue, all the Earth might freeze. But, the scientists quickly add, this situation may be only temporary and there is no need to worry about it for a while - a million years or so. The sun, scientists tell us, is in trouble. The amount of radiation it sends down to Earth has been decreasing noticeably, about one-tenth of 1 percent over five years. If this were to continue, all the Earth might freeze. But, the scientists quickly add, this situation may be only temporary and there is no need to worry about it for a while - a million years or so. News of such trouble creates an aura different from that of other kinds of disaster. Usually, humans feel responsible for it. The sun's ailment is all its own doing, probably some sunspot upset in its metabolism. There is nothing humans can do except to feel a sort of personal concern for a heavenly neighbor. Mankind has reason to feel kindly toward the sun. Out of the thousands on thousands of stars in the universe, it is the one that has chosen to shine on Earth. At this time of year, people feel a closeness toward the sun, perhaps because they see so much less of it. We treasure the small comforts and pleasures it brings to the daily routine - the morning brightness that slants into a kitchen window, the warmth it gives in the lee of a tall building, the dazzle at the end of a workday. A look to the east sees the winter city tinted with rosy light and a look west sees an outsized sun going down into the Jersey Meadows, burnished in a halo of smoke and haze.
