768|1987\01\04|Topics: Star Turns; Drugged Out|they played the Orange Bowl without ''the Boz,'' and Oklahoma's Sooners merely clobbered the Arkansas Razorbacks instead of annihilating them. Brian Bosworth, Oklahoma's All-American linebacker, was sidelined because drug tests administered by the National Collegiate Athletic Association revealed anabolic steroids in his system.|they played the Orange Bowl without ''the Boz,'' and Oklahoma's Sooners merely clobbered the Arkansas Razorbacks instead of annihilating them. Brian Bosworth, Oklahoma's All-American linebacker, was sidelined because drug tests administered by the National Collegiate Athletic Association revealed anabolic steroids in his system. they played the Orange Bowl without ''the Boz,'' and Oklahoma's Sooners merely clobbered the Arkansas Razorbacks instead of annihilating them. Brian Bosworth, Oklahoma's All-American linebacker, was sidelined because drug tests administered by the National Collegiate Athletic Association revealed anabolic steroids in his system. Mr. Bosworth's disqualification was deserved, his collegiate career rightly tarnished. About two dozen other players on bowl-bound teams also were barred for using steroids or other proscribed drugs. But Mr. Bosworth, who finished fourth in voting for this year's Heisman Trophy, captured the attention. That was fitting. He had gone out of his way to attract attention, sporting wild haircuts and depicting himself as a free-spirited maverick. The Oklahoma star accepted the penalty, but pointed out in his defense that the steroids were prescribed by a physician and that he had stopped taking them in March. They nevertheless showed up in a urinalysis in December. He also pointed out - correctly - that steroids are not illegal. Athletes generally use them to add bulk and muscle strength, but they also may damage the heart and liver. Legality isn't the point. Steroids gave Mr. Bosworth an advantage unavailable to his opponents who didn't have access to the drugs or feared their side effects. His exceptional strength and his success were, to some extent, the product of the drugs, not hard training. That's not fair.
