77|1987\01\01|ARTS GROUPS SEEK ETHNICALLY BROADER AUDIENCE|As the ethnic composition of New York City changes with the arrival of Hispanic, black and Asian immigrants, local arts organizations are beginning to try to reach out to new audiences.|As the ethnic composition of New York City changes with the arrival of Hispanic, black and Asian immigrants, local arts organizations are beginning to try to reach out to new audiences. As the ethnic composition of New York City changes with the arrival of Hispanic, black and Asian immigrants, local arts organizations are beginning to try to reach out to new audiences. The New York State Council on the Arts, for example, has just announced a pilot project to try to diversify the ethnic composition of audiences of cultural institutions by the year 2000 to reflect the changes in the composition of the state's population. ''Since 1965, New York State has witnessed dramatic population shifts resulting from new immigrants,'' said Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairman of the council. ''Nearly one in three New Yorkers is a recent immigrant to the country. The greatest number of our newest citizens come from the Caribbean, Latin America and Southeast Asia, but these numbers are not reflected in the audiences of New York's cultural institutions and we believe this should change.'' The council will distribute $243,288 to nine institutions to start outreach programs that could become models for other organizations. The institutions in New York City are Ballet Hispanico, Museum of the City of New York, the New York Philharmonic, the Queens Symphony Orchestra and the Studio Museum of Harlem. Also awarded grants were the Albany Institute of History and Arts, the Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra, the Metropolitan School for the Arts in Onondaga County and the Syracuse Symphony Orchestra. The projects include discussions and seminars, hiring marketing and promotion experts, offering reduced ticket prices at performances, creating new multicultural events to attract a more diverse audience and scheduling concerts in upstate New York in communities that would not otherwise have them. $1.5 Million Being Sought Mrs. Hart said the council was asking the State Legislature for $1.5 million next year to expand the project to include other institutions throughout the state. She said that the council, through this project, recognized that cultural organizations needed the patronage and appreciation of the public and that the public needed the institutions as well. Tucker Ashworth, a spokesman for the City Planning Department, said the city's non-Hispanic white population declined from 63 percent of the total population in the 1970 census to 51.9 percent in the 1980 census. But according to a recent analysis of population samples by John D. Kasarda, chairman of the sociology department at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, blacks, Hispanics and Asians already constitute a majority of city residents. Edward Kresky, vice chairman of the council, who with Mrs. Hart and others helped start the council's pilot project, said recent articles in The New York Times about New York City's changing population had been the catalyst for the effort. Mr. Kresky, who held a symposium on audience diversification last spring at New York University, said: ''We have ethnic groups that are entirely new, and the percentage of our population aged 60 and over has vastly increased. In our symphony halls in the state we have an audience that is primarily white and is older than I recall when I was a young concertgoer. Our museums have to reach out more into ethnic arts than they have in the past. There has to be more of a move into the community and back and forth.'' ''It's very important that the arts council break some new ground in this area,'' he said. ''We have had a great growth in numbers of institutions. We need equal growth in the numbers of audiences if the organizations are going to survive. Some of the people we're seeking to reach have never had the experience of taking their children to concerts or museums. There are economic hurdles, but if they'll go and feel comfortable with things they are attunded to ethnically, hopefully they will broaden their interests into others areas.'' Concerts in Harlem The New York Philharmonic, which received a $30,000 grant, began its community outreach program seven years ago with concerts at Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem and will continue with concerts, seminars and discussions in Harlem and other communities. Such programs occasionally run into snags when politics and the arts mix. Last month, more than a third of the New York Philharmonic refused to play at a free concert at the church because one of its ministers, a supporter of the Black Muslim minister Louis Farrakhan, would not denounce anti-Semitic statements Mr. Farrakhan made last year. The concert took place anyway. The next New York Philharmonic concert in Harlem will be Jan. 5, 1988, at the renovated Apollo Theater and will be conducted by Zubin Mehta, according to Daniel J. Windham, director of educational activities at the Philharmonic. The move to the Apollo was not related to the incident at the church, Mr. Windham said, but reflected the intention of the Philharmonic to try to reach a larger Harlem audience. ''It's a part of our mandate and policy to be a cultural institution for all of the city and its inhabitants,'' Mr. Windham said. ''Historically, people have not come, perhaps because it's unfamiliar territory or they may have felt they were not wanted. Those perceptions are pretty longstanding, and it's up to the institution to try to break down those barriers.'' A Sense of Proprietorship Dr. Mary Schmidt Campbell, executive director of the Studio Museum of Harlem, which received a $45,000 grant for its program to develop new audiences, said some people forget the pluralistic nature of society and the need to try to include its many different facets in cultural life. ''One of the reasons minorities don't participate as much is that they don't have a sense of cultural proprietorship at the traditional institutions,'' Dr. Campbell said. ''Blacks, Hispanics and Asians have rich cultural traditions. They are all very complex. There is a real need for them to be able to have a sense of ownership over their own culture and own cultural prerogatives. They are not permitted to at a lot of mainstream cultural institutions.'' ''An institution is a place that has to have a role for people, people to be volunteers, to come to events, to help run the institutions so that they become their home, their places,'' she continued. ''If traditional institutions are going to be successful, they have to begin to involve minority population in ways to make them feel truly part of the institution, not just as an audience. Anything is possible with imaginative leadership, and that's just what it will take.''
