770|1987\01\04|49 LOST AS PLANE CRASHES IN AFRICA|A Brazilian jetliner crashed and disintegrated in a forest outside this West African city soon after takeoff early today, and 49 of the 51 people aboard were presumed dead, officials said.|A Brazilian jetliner crashed and disintegrated in a forest outside this West African city soon after takeoff early today, and 49 of the 51 people aboard were presumed dead, officials said. A Brazilian jetliner crashed and disintegrated in a forest outside this West African city soon after takeoff early today, and 49 of the 51 people aboard were presumed dead, officials said. The pilot of the plane, a Varig Airlines Boeing 707, had reported an engine afire. The two passengers who survived were gravely injured, according to Ivoirian officials and spokesmen for the airline. The airline said one survivor was an Ivoirian citizen and the other was from France. Other reports identified the second person as a Brazilian of Lebanese origin. The flight's destination was Rio de Janeiro. One American Among Dead Those presumed dead included one American, according to the airline's office in Rio de Janeiro. The other victims were from Europe, Africa and South America. United States Embassy personnel flew over the crash site, about 12 miles east of the sprawling city limits of Abidjan, the largest city in the Ivory Coast. They described the scene as devastating. Willy Holmes, a cultural affairs officer at the embassy, said officals reported ''there were very little traces of the aircraft.'' He added: ''The impact was such that the plane exploded. There was nothing there.'' Few Bodies Found Television footage from the area showed French troops and Ivoirian rescue workers searching through dense undergrowth and felled trees for bodies and debris. Soldiers later sealed off the area. Mr. Holmes said this evening that only six or seven bodies had been found. The soldiers who sealed off the area said the four-engine jetliner crashed about 300 yards from La Me River, which rescuers had to cross in knee-deep mud, near the village of Grand-Alepe. They said debris from the plane was still burning. The crash also touched off brush fires. The flight, carrying 39 passengers and 12 crew members, took off about 1 A.M. from the Port-Bouet airport, which serves Abidjan. The pilot immediately reported to the control tower that he was encountering problems, and then that the plane had an engine fire. Agence France-Presse said the pilot's last message was that he was circling to dump excess fuel before coming back to land. Inaccessible Site When contact was lost, the control tower called for help from French marines stationed near the airport under military aid agreements. Two units headed for the crash area on dirt roads, some traveling by foot. A French helicopter located the site when it spotted flames about an hour after the crash. Helicopters were unable to land in the jungle, but four French soldiers, including a doctor, were lowered to the wreckage and found the two survivors, Lieut. Col. Jean-Claude Blache, the unit's second-in-command, told Agence France-Presse. The agency reported that the survivors were in very serious condition in Cocody Hospital in Abidjan and that one was in a coma. Varig's office in Rio said the jet, which was purchased in 1968, was recently sold to the Brazilian Air Force but had not been delivered.
