771|1987\01\04|HEART STOPPING FIESTA DESPITE NBC FUMBLES|AS a game, Penn State's victory over Miami in the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl wasn't pretty, but it was heart-stopping exciting.|AS a game, Penn State's victory over Miami in the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl wasn't pretty, but it was heart-stopping exciting. AS a game, Penn State's victory over Miami in the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl wasn't pretty, but it was heart-stopping exciting. As a telecast, it was uneven, ranging from good to goofy. As an idea, it was brilliant. Coming a day after five bowl games transformed America into a nation of couch potatoes, the made-for-TV game succeeded in cutting through the numbing assault of touchdowns and hype for a simple reason: The winner would be the only undefeated major team, the undisputed national champion in a sport that does not always have one. For having the foresight to realize how captivating such a game could be, NBC Sports deserves a hundred hosannas. Even though the network certainly was not motivated by charitable concerns, its willingness to move the game from Jan. 1 to prime time a night later created a spectacle. The winner-take-all stakes, the crowd alternately roaring and deathly still, resulted in an eerie, historical feel. Nobody seemed to know how to act. And so nobody acted. Missing, but not missed, was the stagy, rehearsed posturing and mugging for the cameras so common in television sports. We saw kids, and some adults, on the edge of genuine emotion. This was special, a desert happening that Carlos Castaneda might appreciate. What an ending! NBC, however, was less than flawless in its presentation. In fact, the network seemed downright schizophrenic in its approach. On one hand, NBC officials promised that they would let the game speak for itself, that overkill would get a day off. Thus, the network that gave us a two-hour plus pregame show to the most recent Super Bowl limited itself to a 15-minute pregame show for the Fiesta Bowl. While that was no doubt a move dictated by dollars, it was still the right move. On the other hand, the network sabotaged itself by using three broadcasters. Two are always enough. If a network doesn't have confidence that one analyst can carry the load, it should replace him, not add another. As it was, neither Jimmy Cefalo nor Bob Griese, the analysts, seemed to offer consistent insight. Back and forth they went, never seeming to hit a long, smooth patch, together or separately. The extra man does not explain a snakebit sequence for Cefalo. As cameras focused on Shane Conlan, Cefalo said the Penn State linebacker was not much of a factor. Conlan intercepted a pass on the next play. Later, Cefalo said Penn State had not lost a fumble in three games. Penn State lost a fumble on the next play. Cefalo took it well. ''Again, the direct line straight down to the helmets on the field,'' he said with a laugh. Charlie Jones, the play-by-play man, at times seemed slow to call the action, but his raspy voice is distinct and somehow pleasant. By being enthusiastic without shouting, he also captured the drama. He erred badly, though, when, over replays, he questioned an interference call against Penn State. ''That's the kind of call that instant replay was created for in the N.F.L.,'' he said. Wrong. Only touchdowns and change of possessions are subject to instant replay. He should know that, and so should somebody at NBC who could have corrected him on the spot. Some of the pictures were awesome. A favorite was the replay showing that what seemed initially to be a fumble by John Shaffer, the Penn State quarterback, was actually an interception by a Miami lineman who was on the ground near Shaffer's feet. That's the stuff that can make television better than being there. The goofiest part of the telecast came at halftime. While Bob Costas did a nice analysis of the first half, saying how turnovers and good punting had kept Penn State in the game despite an anemic offense, matters soon degenerated when Tom Brokaw took over for a news update. Such moves have become common for networks eager to advertise their anchormen to the millions watching sports. The idea is not really to give news. It's a hope that some of the millions will turn from now on to the anchorman they saw on the game, thus boosting that network's ratings and ad rates. That's business. The problem here, however, was that Brokaw was sitting beside Costas, at the game. Usually, networks have their anchormen in the news studio for such segments. Thus, with the field behind him and marching bands blaring, Brokaw talked about, among other things, the fire that killed nearly 100 people in Puerto Rico. The effect was to trivialize the tragedy. That's carrying business too far. Halftime also brought us President Reagan from the White House. Costas said it wasn't an interview, just a chat. It wasn't really that, either, as the President went into a long story about his start in broadcasting. First Costas said he couldn't hear because of technical problems. Before long, nobody could hear as the crowd noise in the background grew louder and louder. The whole thing was such a bust that Jones, when he got the mike back, felt the need to say that all broadcasters tend to lower their voices the more they talk. Here's a better explanation: NBC had a lousy idea. Next time, let it get Brokaw and Reagan together in a quiet room, and talk about something else, say, Iran. TV SPORTS
