774|1987\01\04|'GOODBYE MR. CHIPS' IS WELCOME ONCE MORE|A good many ''Masterpiece Theater'' fans evidently had something of a struggle getting through the 11 chapters of ''Paradise Postponed,'' not least because of the constant shifts between the present and different periods in the past. The attempt by John Mortimer, the writer, to break out of what he feels is the rut of chronological naturalism in most television dramas was admirable but too often confusing.|A good many ''Masterpiece Theater'' fans evidently had something of a struggle getting through the 11 chapters of ''Paradise Postponed,'' not least because of the constant shifts between the present and different periods in the past. The attempt by John Mortimer, the writer, to break out of what he feels is the rut of chronological naturalism in most television dramas was admirable but too often confusing. A good many ''Masterpiece Theater'' fans evidently had something of a struggle getting through the 11 chapters of ''Paradise Postponed,'' not least because of the constant shifts between the present and different periods in the past. The attempt by John Mortimer, the writer, to break out of what he feels is the rut of chronological naturalism in most television dramas was admirable but too often confusing. Tonight at 9 on WNET, ''Masterpiece Theater'' returns to more familiar storytelling ground with a new - yes, yet another - adaptation of ''Goodbye Mr. Chips,'' the short novel by James Hilton. Published in 1933, the book gave birth to one of those special literary characters who are inevitably referred to as enduring and revered. In any event, after having been portrayed in the movies by Robert Donat and Peter O'Toole, Mr. Chipping, as he was baptized, is now being given a gently virtuosic turn by Roy Marsden, perhaps best-known over here as Adam Dalgliesh in the ''Mystery!'' dramatizations of P. D. James novels. In his introduction to this evening's episode, the first of the three in the British mini-series, Alistair Cooke reminds us that the year before ''Goodbye Mr. Chips'' appeared in print, Mr. Hilton was being hailed as a distinguished literary newcomer with the publication of his ''Lost Horizon.'' Then, Mr. Cooke recalls, ''he wrote this thundering best-seller and was instantly relegated by the critics to the lowly ranks of a successful popular author.'' As if that weren't enough, the subsequent film adaptations tended to sentimentalize even more than the book the character of Chips, who was based on Mr. Hilton's own schoolmaster father, John Hilton. This new version, written for television by Alexander Baron and script-edited by Terrance Dicks, generally puts things back in balance without sacrificing a single heart tug. On the surface, of course, there is good old Chips, a reserved, somewhat stuffy relic of the past, still inviting the new boys at Brookfield school to tea in order to know them better and ease their passage into adulthood. He cuts the familiar figure of the demanding but always supportive favorite teacher. Beneath this comforting facade, however, Chips is always demonstrating that is he something other than what he seems. When we first meet him in 1933, he is 85 years old, long retired but still living near his beloved school and trying to write a book (''just the odd jottings'') about his life. The story is told in flashback and, happily, with chronological clarity. Going back to 1870, we find the rather prim Mr. Chipping in his 20's and just about ready to admit he is a failure as a teacher since going down from Cambridge. Traipsing from post to post without distinction, he is to be given one final chance at the church school of Brookfield. Although he concedes that he does not get down on his knees to pray, Mr. Chipping insists he is ''as Christian as the next man - but no more so.'' It doesn't take long for his wards in Latin class to decide that they have a classic victim on their hands. The cutups drive him from the room and nearly from the school before he decides to stand his ground and dig in. His weapon is cricket, a sport he somehow mastered in college and now uses to subdue his young tormentors. A solution only to be found in books, perhaps, but Chipping the loser is deftly transformed into Chips the leader. And then there is the image of Chips the entrenched bachelor, seen after by his devoted house matron Mrs. Wickett (Anne Kristen). A wife could help any ambition to become headmaster, but Chips insists that he is perfectly happy as he is. That's before he meets Katherine Bridges (Jill Meager). Chips is 47; she is 23. Worse, she is a ''new woman,'' given to riding bicycles and speaking out against jingoism and colonialism. He should be shocked but is charmed. She should be bored but is intrigued, discovering that ''he argues keenly and very honorably, and he's willing to listen.'' It is Katherine who gets to the heart of Chips' character: ''gentle, quiet and warm - and steely strong inside.'' The inevitable marriage proposal is a model of economy. He: ''I am only a schoolmaster.'' She: ''It's the best thing to be in the world.'' He, falling to his knees: ''Would you do me the honor of becoming my wife?'' She, laughing: ''Honor be blowed - you love me!'' Chips surprises us again years later, during World War II, when he discovers that common sense and humanity do not necessarily prevail in the affairs of men. He is shaken by the death lists containing the names of so many former students. Always the patriot, he believes his country is fighting the good fight. But he is no blinkered idealogue. He upsets the warmongers by praising in chapel service a former German colleague and friend who has fallen on the other side of the battle. And he goes out of his way to be kind to a student who, after his brother is killed fighting and his father is returned as a basket case, decides to become a pacifist because the war is wrong. When the student is accused of cowardice, it is Chips who argues that the boy suffers from ''a tragic moral courage - greater perhaps than the will to fight.'' These are the unexpected twists of character that give Chips his popular longevity. Even as he resists what others might perceive as progress - where someone else sees the airplane as a device for bringing nations closer together, he would prefer to return to the stagecoach - he is uncommonly receptive to both rational argument and basic human decency. He sees the new century, our century, as vulgar and senseless in many of its manifestations, but argues only for alternatives that we can all endorse: good manners, good sense, kindness. Directed by Gareth Davies, this carefully measured and affecting BBC/ MGM co-production has the considerable benefits of superb performances, with Mr. Marsden confidently leading the way, and wonderfully authentic locations (many of the school scenes were done at Repton in Derbyshire, the same one used in the Robert Donat film). But the lion's share of credit still belongs to James Hilton. His little story seems to be a fail-safe classic. TV VIEW
