778|1987\01\04|O'ROURKE PUTS BLAME FOR CUTS ON DEMOCRATS|COUNTY Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke signed the 1987 budget last week but not without warning that he was holding Democratic legislators responsible for eliminating an estimated 55 county jobs that would require ''some cuts in operational services performed by the county.''|COUNTY Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke signed the 1987 budget last week but not without warning that he was holding Democratic legislators responsible for eliminating an estimated 55 county jobs that would require ''some cuts in operational services performed by the county.'' COUNTY Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke signed the 1987 budget last week but not without warning that he was holding Democratic legislators responsible for eliminating an estimated 55 county jobs that would require ''some cuts in operational services performed by the county.'' He said he was ''sorry'' that the Board of Legislators had ''cut back on the Hudson River Museum and the Council for the Arts, because they are quality-of-life issues for Westchester, and especially sorry they cut back on Youth Services because it's the wave of the future.'' Mr. O'Rourke, a Republican, said he thought the Republican majority ''did a good honest job of trying to cut back the budget in the face of the political flack they were taking from the Democrats,'' who made an issue this year of the ''phantom army'' of more than 900 unfilled but financed positions. ''The Democrats also voted against child care, against the aged, against youth and against the budget in general,'' he said. ''I intend to campaign against them personally in this next election,'' Mr. O'Rourke vowed, saying, ''I'm going to get out there and tell people exactly what they represent.'' Audrey G. Hochberg, a Scarsdale Democrat who took a leading role in this year's budget debate, said she would welcome Mr. O'Rourke's role in this year's county legislative campaign because, she said, it was the Democrats in some cases who backed Mr. O'Rourke's spending plan against Republican cutbacks. ''The Democrats wanted to maintain the full $100,000 appropriation for Youth Services and the Republicans succeeded in cutting it out, and that's why we voted against the budget,'' she said. Legislator John W. DeMarco of White Plains was the only one of six Democrats on the 17-member Board who voted for the budget. Mrs. Hochberg said: ''We even voted to restore some of the funding for the Hudson River Museum,'' where Mr. O'Rourke's proposed $975,000 allocation was cut to $500,000. ''We were willing to support it at $630,000, which was the 1986 appropriation, but the Republicans voted to reduce it to $500,000 and to say it should be phased out.'' The Democrat said that ''looking at the big picture, Mr. O'Rourke's budget contained a broken promise to the public, in that he had said we'd institute early retirement and use it as a way of reducing the county's work force.'' Instead, she said, he increased it by 32 jobs. ''We had an opportunity to reduce it by 400 jobs without damaging the county's ability to provide services.'' Mr. O'Rourke, as well as Edward J. Brady, the Thornwood Republican and Chairman of the Board, and Leonard N. Spano, Republican of Yonkers and Chairman of the Budget Committee, had argued in favor of retaining the unfilled jobs, both as a necessary element in staff fluctuations in a county work force of more than 8,000 and as a means of providing a fiscal surplus for unexpected expenses. ''Those jobs are in the budget,'' the County Executive said, referring to the 55 positions cut from the budget, ''because they are intended to be filled.'' Opponents of maintaining the unfilled positions say many unfilled jobs had been vacant since March, indicating that their elimination would not reduce efficiency. Mr. O'Rourke said he regretted that the Hudson River Museum did not have a ''constituency'' on the Board of Legislators. ''They don't appreciate the fact that this great countywide museum is very important.'' He said he would continue to do his best for the museum while ''hoping that what the Board said about cutting it down every year is not true.'' Joyce Green, Chairman of the Board of the Hudson River Museum, said the board of directors would meet Thursday to decide what to do about the reduced financing and the prospect of the institution being eventually phased out as a recipient of county funds. ''We have several options,'' she said. ''One is to close, another is to close partially and the third is to close the planetarium on July 4,'' when the museum's new fiscal year begins. ''Closing a planetarium is a serious matter in a county that prides itself on being a good place to live.'' Mrs. Green said that the museum had recently purchased a new Zeiss ''star machine'' for $450,000. ''We raised the money for it, but were looking to the county for operating money, about $250,000,'' she said. The museum's $1.6 million budget, she said, would represent $500,000 from the county, $400,000 from Yonkers, where it is located, $260,000 from foundations, $200,000 from corporations and the rest from individuals and other sources. Mrs. Green said they noticed in last year's budget that the Board said it would phase out its support for the museum, ''but we thought they were saying they wanted us to work hard, and we did.'' Now, she indicated, the museum will have to plan for such a phaseout. The reduction and possible elimination of funds will create new difficulties in seeking help from corporations, some of which ''say they'll hold off until they see what the county does,'' she said, and in finding a new director for the institution. ''We have several fine candidates, but with this slap in the face I don't know if they'll want to come.'' Christopher Bruhl, the executive director of the Council for the Arts in Westchester, said that while the $285,000 allocated by the Board was a reduction from the $495,000 requested by Mr. O'Rourke, it represented an increase over the $270,375 provided for last year. ''The impact is in lost opportunities, rather than in losing organizations,'' he said. ''Arts financing is complicated,'' he said, ''with the box office providing 50 to 60 percent of the cost of putting on a program and contributions and government grants doing the rest.'' As audience demand increases, and that is the situation in Westchester, he said, ''it becomes necessary that all parts of the pie get bigger.'' He said the that new or refurbished facilities in Peekskill, Tarrytown, Mount Vernon, New Rochelle, Pelham and other areas were stimulating greater audience demand, ''but bigger audiences only make you go broke faster unless you have other sources of financing.'' He said the county's financing for next year ''won't mean doors will be shutting, but we won't see new ones opening.'' The Hudson River Museum once received funds from the Arts Council, ''roughly about $30,000 a year for a decade,'' he said, ''until Yonkers pulled out and the county stepped in.'' It received $600,000 to $700,000 in county funds in recent years, he noted, which was about 40 percent of its budget. The Arts Council's $270,000 went to 65 arts organizations, representing 3 percent of a combined budget of $9 million. ''It's all a question of scale,'' Mr. Bruhl said. Ann Spaeth, Executive Director of Family Information and Referral Services Teams, as well as convener of the Youth Services Coalition, said she was deeply disappointed that the Board had failed to provide the $100,000 requested by Mr. O'Rourke for the agencies needing help. ''Last year, we tried for $250,000 and it was eliminated; now the $100,000 was killed,'' she said. ''They're afraid of setting a precedent, especially during times of belt-tightening, but they don't recognize that it's sorely needed.'' She said it was the ''norm'' for counties to provide money and that, in fact, ''it's the state's intention to match county funds.'' Mrs. Spaeth said that ''we were addressing specific contracts of service'' in such areas as teen-age pregnancies, suicide and drug prevention, children of single-parent families, programs for latchkey children and problems associated with disenfranchised families. The county, she said, ''had been blessed with agencies such as Boy's Clubs and the Y's that have been able to operate programs as a sideline, but everybody's missions are more specific now and the problems are greater.'' It required sophisticated staffing, for example, to deal with multi-problem families, she said. The more than 50 organizations involved in providing or supporting these services have already started working on gaining support for another effort to encourage county funds for youth services, she said, and that would include efforts to gain support from town supervisors. Leaders of the Board's Republican majority had cited comments by Supervisor Charles G. DiGiacomo, Republican of Cortlandt, in turning down the Youth Services allocation, recalling that he said in testifying before the Board that the Youth Bureau's work was a ''duplication of efforts at the local level.'' Mrs. Spaeth said the state money that would match county funds ''would not be available to the towns; the state law says it must be used for countywide efforts.'' Mr. DiGiacomo, who had appeared before the legislators as part of a bipartisan panel of supervisors recommending budget reductions, said that the Board ''resented our appearance before them; we could feel it.'' He said he thought there would now be an ''ongoing dialogue between us.'' ''We are charged by law with collecting the county taxes, and as long as we have to do that they can rest assured that we'll say something about it,'' he said. The supervisors' principal interest this year, he said, had been to seek some reduction in the number of vacant jobs carried by the county government. ''We're pleased they responded to us and to other people,'' he said.
