78|1987\01\01|IN DESIGN TRENDS, A GLANCE BACK AND HINTS OF '87|IN the opening scene of the movie ''Ruthless People,'' Sam Stone, played by Danny DeVito, plots the death of his wife, Barbara (Bette Midler), an obstreperous Beverly Hills matron. ''God I hate that woman,'' he rants. ''I hate the way she licks stamps. I hate her furniture!''|IN the opening scene of the movie ''Ruthless People,'' Sam Stone, played by Danny DeVito, plots the death of his wife, Barbara (Bette Midler), an obstreperous Beverly Hills matron. ''God I hate that woman,'' he rants. ''I hate the way she licks stamps. I hate her furniture!'' IN the opening scene of the movie ''Ruthless People,'' Sam Stone, played by Danny DeVito, plots the death of his wife, Barbara (Bette Midler), an obstreperous Beverly Hills matron. ''God I hate that woman,'' he rants. ''I hate the way she licks stamps. I hate her furniture!'' ''I hate her furniture!'' may be the most telling line of 1986. The furniture in question was in the Italian avant-garde Memphis style, and Mr. DeVito's character may have been speaking for many when he uttered this impassioned critique of Italian 'nuovo' design. That Memphis furniture wound up as a comic device in a Hollywood movie says a lot about the year 1986. There were no Italian gurus creating never-before-seen furniture forms, no one all-embracing movement like post-modernism to hang stylistic hats upon. Instead, 1986 was a year in which comfort, expressed through the use of natural materials and in furniture that was rarely outrageous, took center stage. It was a year in which Witold Rybczynski, a Canadian architect, wrote ''Home: A Short History of an Idea,'' a cultural inquiry into comfort. The book confirmed the reactions of Danny DeVito's Sam Stone, a design victim if ever there was one. Bill Stumpf, a Minneapolis furniture designer, says ''Home'' is about the major design issue of the 80's, adding, ''A broader sense of physical comfort is something we've denied for many years.'' Among designers themselves, 1986 may be ultimately remembered as the year in which the profession lost two of its leading lights, George Nelson and Raymond Loewy. Mr. Loewy's streamlined forms optimistically expressed the spirit of the machine age. An expert at packaging images, including his own, he predated the current cult of personality and may have been America's first designer superstar. George Nelson, in addition to being a furniture designer, was an irascible critic who suffered fools poorly and was fond of saying, ''We live in a society saturated with visual illiterates.'' Their deaths were a major loss. But many of their concerns live on in a feast of books and exhibitions that celebrate design - not as a profession dedicated to making designer teakettles, but as the stuff of daily life, past and present. At the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, ''Milestones: 50 Years of Goods and Services'' cast its eye on 50 important everyday artifacts, from power mowers to air-conditioners. In his book ''Populuxe,'' Thomas Hine fondly examined the ebullience of the 1950's and the early 60's, from the Miami Beach hotel architect Morris Lapidus to the ridged potato chip. At the Brooklyn Museum, a major exhibition, ''The Machine Age in America 1918-1941'' celebrates the heyday of futuristic streamlined design. The amount of time it takes for anything historical to undergo a revival seems to be shrinking every year. Though the 1950's, 40's, 30's and even the 60's continued to be trendy, above all 1986 was the year of ''Vienna 1900,'' and Josef Hoffmann became firmly established as an icon. In addition to the ''Vienna 1900'' exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, new reproductions and knockoffs of ''W.W.'' (for Wiener Werkstatte) abounded. At the Metropolitan Museum, ''In Pursuit of Beauty: Americans and the Esthetic Movement'' unveils the not-so-distant treasures of the American esthetic movement. There were more reproductions of Frank Lloyd Wright. In a rather sobering commentary on the historic preservation movement, the antiques dealer Margot Johnson predicted that architectural elements from lost buildings by Louis Sullivan and by Frank Lloyd Wright will be among next year's hot design collectibles. At the designer show houses, those faithful bastions of decorating luxury, opulence was the operative word. It reached its peak, perhaps, at the Southampton designer show house, where decorators went into a fringe frenzy - one room featuring an improbable 82 yards of fringe. The use of chintz, while it will always be with us, may have crested for now, as might faux finishes. Last year, design formality was found in the use of rich fabrics such as silks, satins, heavy velvets, jacquards. Some window treatments were so wavy they made one yearn for Dramamine. Outside, there was a wealth of status garden furniture, especially the English teak bench and a proliferation of the British perennial flower border. Gardening continued to be the subject of probing cocktail conservation such as ''Are your hemerocallis blooming a week earlier this year?'' Outside and in, the look was rich, ''the richer the better,'' in the words of the decorator Mario Buatta, who added, ''Houses are becoming imitative of King Ludwig of Bavaria.'' If there was a bridge between old money and the masses, it was to be found in the home furnishings of Ralph Lauren. From his new Polo shop on Madison Avenue, Mr. Lauren purveys the image of the mythical comforts of home - an image of people sipping Sherry on a squishy sofa beside a roaring fire, beagles at hand. His influence could be found at the Southern Furniture Market in High Point, N.C., last fall, where new designs were old-looking, comfortable and above all nonthreatening: chaises, daybeds, sprawling oversized chairs - lots of stripped pine and wicker. Mr. Lauren creates a personal vision of comfort. In 1986 industrial designers, too, wrestled with the idea of comfort, in not-so-rarefied products. Cousins Design in New York, for example, introduced kitchen ovens for Thermador that featured ''friendly'' squishy polyurethane knobs and handles. The Sharp Corporation continued to inject comforting elements into its products - whimsical pink microwave ovens and curvaceous sea-foam green radios. Though 1986 was not a year for pervasive trends, new directions could be detected, particularly in the expressive use of materials. The new year should see continued use of patinaed metal, wrought iron, galvanized steel, oxidized copper and the deliberate use of distressed surfaces to express age and romance. ''The machine ethic did not allow imperfection,'' notes the designer John Saladino, remarking on the preponderance of fake water stains and mottled textures. Some see an inexorable swing of the pendulum - a return to materials left in their natural state, a sort of design equivalent of health food. The new offices of the designers Massimo and Lella Vignelli, for example, sport waxed lead walls, sandblasted glass panes and a raw steel table. At the restaurant Coastal, to open later this year, the designer Sam Lopata - the man known for his use of tile and mirror and the phrase ''noise is theater'' - will be using simple natural materials, including wood chairs and unvarnished floors. At the very least, the use of natural materials seemed to signal a new communion among design, craft and art. According to Massimo Vignelli, contemporary artists like Richard Serra and Donald Judd have been influential in their pioneering use of materials. Designers' inspiration now ''comes from the arts rather than other designers,'' he said. At Zona, a Santa Fe-style store in SoHo, the natural look reaches some sort of apogee as urbanites pull up in Saabs and Mercedeses to buy birch-bark and willow Ojibwa baskets, forged iron candlesticks and shapely bundles of twigs. As in years past, 1987 should also see the proliferation of the so-called ''design object.'' Following in the footsteps of the Tizio lamp, next year's most sought-after status symbol may very well be the 23-piece, $4,000 Alessi cookware set also designed by Richard Sapper. Seven years in the making, it is a collaboration between Mr. Sapper and six of the world's most illustrious chefs. It is a state-of-the-art design not likely to be used by Mr. Sapper. ''Cook?'' he asks. ''All I can do is brew tea, boil an egg and grill steak.''
