780|1987\01\04|What Went Wrong?|Leon Wieseltier's analysis of the relationship between the press and the public was insightful. However, in mentioning ''that the news media, most of all television, mesmerize the population and its politicians with these melodramas,'' he neglected to mention the complicity of all the players in this dynamic.|Leon Wieseltier's analysis of the relationship between the press and the public was insightful. However, in mentioning ''that the news media, most of all television, mesmerize the population and its politicians with these melodramas,'' he neglected to mention the complicity of all the players in this dynamic. Leon Wieseltier's analysis of the relationship between the press and the public was insightful. However, in mentioning ''that the news media, most of all television, mesmerize the population and its politicians with these melodramas,'' he neglected to mention the complicity of all the players in this dynamic. It is a maxim of hypnosis that you cannot ''mesmerize'' the unwilling. For six long years, the media played to the mass audience the lines it yearned to hear: ''The President is popular . . . so likable . . . the economy is rebounding . . . we have recovered,'' creating the context for the President's power and Rambo-like arrogance. They did the same thing in reverse to Jimmy Carter, repeating enough times, ''He's weak . . . he's weak,'' until the public was sufficiently programmed to believe, without much thought, that President Carter's restraint, reflectiveness and compassion were tantamount to weakness. As for the polls, mesmerized zombies regurgitate the myths with which they themselves have been programmed. It has been a tribute to the intelligence of the American public that a sizable minority of citizens all along refused to be ''mesmerized.'' But minorities do not win elections, and all of us are stuck with leadership determined by the media myth-makers and myth-breakers, not by properly informed voters.  TIMOTHY WRIGHT  New York City
