789|1987\01\04|MARY TYLER MOORE, LYNN REDGRAVE SHARE A ROLE|The two actresses seated on a couch in a backstage dressing room of the Wilbur Theater in Boston make an eye-jolting contrast. Mary Tyler Moore, wearing a bright red dress, exudes the nervous crackling energy of a thoroughbred stamping at the starting gate. Lynn Redgrave, clad in black, projects an amiable reserve, gazing impassively through cornflower blue eyes and speaking in soft, musically rounded cadences.|The two actresses seated on a couch in a backstage dressing room of the Wilbur Theater in Boston make an eye-jolting contrast. Mary Tyler Moore, wearing a bright red dress, exudes the nervous crackling energy of a thoroughbred stamping at the starting gate. Lynn Redgrave, clad in black, projects an amiable reserve, gazing impassively through cornflower blue eyes and speaking in soft, musically rounded cadences. The two actresses seated on a couch in a backstage dressing room of the Wilbur Theater in Boston make an eye-jolting contrast. Mary Tyler Moore, wearing a bright red dress, exudes the nervous crackling energy of a thoroughbred stamping at the starting gate. Lynn Redgrave, clad in black, projects an amiable reserve, gazing impassively through cornflower blue eyes and speaking in soft, musically rounded cadences. As Ms. Redgrave reclines, Ms. Moore leans forward and chatters with the emphatic enthusiasm of her most famous television character, Mary Richards. Her brown eyes snap as she flashes her wide, eager-to-please grin. ''What the critics see in New York will be substantially different from what the critics saw here,'' she says of the play ''Sweet Sue,'' scheduled to open Thursday at the Music Box Theater on Broadway. ''The consensus was that the play was funny but missing some depth. Two days after the reviews, the changes started coming one after another, and they have been wonderful. Without losing its laughs, the play has become a lot more serious.'' A. R. (Pete) Gurney Jr.'s bittersweet comedy, about a suburban woman in her late 40's who falls in love with her son's Dartmouth College roommate, earned mixed reviews for its author and accolades for its co-stars when it began out-of-town tryouts in Boston early last month. In the play, Ms. Moore and Ms. Redgrave both portray the same character, Susan Wetherell, a successful designer of Hallmark greeting cards who loses her heart to handsome, 22-year-old Jake. The character of Jake, like that of Susan, is played by two actors - John K. Linton and Barry Tubb - who interact with the two Susans in an emotionally tumultuous roundelay whose outcome - do they or don't they consummate their love? - is left tantalizingly unclear. Bantering, debating, agonizing, jumping together through emotional hoops of desire, uncertainty, exhilaration, fear, jealousy and tenderness, Ms. Moore as Susan and Ms. Redgrave as her alter ego, Susan Too, create a composite larger-than-life portrait of a mature woman in the throes of belated first love but battling it tooth and nail. The notion of having two actors simultaneously playing the same character is not new. Eugene O'Neill did it in ''Days Without End,'' and it was the central device of Peter Nichols's ''Passion Play.'' ''Pete Gurney described the concept by likening it to Picasso's renderings of two-faced women,'' Ms. Moore explained. ''Though she is the same woman, each face is a different aspect. I actually think we all have 10 or 20 different voices in our heads that are alternating continuously. In 'Sweet Sue,' the differences are not written but are in the playing. One of us isn't the good one and the other the bad one or anything so obvious.'' ''The differences come out of the fact that Mary and I are two very different people projecting different versions of what Susan is,'' Ms. Redgrave added . ''I think that the role could be taken by two other people and played legitimately but in a totally different way from how we're doing it.'' Of the two actresses, Ms. Moore identifies with the character more directly. ''She's a little like I am and a little like the roles I've played before, including 'Ordinary People,' in that she is a product of what she was trained to be and to do,'' Ms. Moore reflected. ''In one speech, Susan says that she was brought up to believe that if you play by the rules and wait long enough and have been a good girl, you get your reward - that everything will fall into place and make sense. Of course, life isn't like that. But through her relationship with the boy, she discovers that if she lets go a little and allows something to happen that doesn't have a beginning, middle or end, it can free her as a woman and an artist.'' Ms. Redgrave's vision of the character is a bit more abstract. ''Though I haven't played a woman like Sue before, I know who she is,'' she said. ''For me, one of the saddest sights is people who are full of if-onlys. Susan is one of those if-only people who, until she meets Jake, has been unable to let the floodgates open.'' ''Sweet Sue'' is the first play by A. R. Gurney Jr., the author of ''The Dining Room,'' ''The Middle Ages,'' ''The Perfect Party'' and other dramas that delineate the manners and foibles of prosperous White Anglo-Saxon Protestant Americans, to make it to Broadway. Ms. Moore became involved with the play last summer when it was first presented at the Williamstown Theater Festival in Williamstown, Mass. ''I was coming off a failed TV series and a badly reviewed movie  [ ''Just Between Friends'' ] , and I was hurting,'' she recalled. ''I needed to get back up on a horse quickly, and so I called my old friend Nikos Pscaharaopoulos, at Williamstown, since he had been saying for years that we should work together. He brought me the play to read, and I loved it immediately. Originally, I thought it was going to be a summer project. I never expected it would move to Broadway.'' Once Ms. Moore became involved, the production, which had started out as a second-stage feature at the festival, was transferred to the company's main stage as a work-in-progress, with Maria Tucci, a Williamstown Theater company member, playing opposite her. Ms. Redgrave was attracted to ''Sweet Sue'' for several reasons. ''I had been looking fruitlessly for a long time for a new play as opposed to a classic,'' she explained. ''I get offered a lot of dead authors and a lot of English imports. Either the plays aren't very exciting, or I feel I'm being asked to play a character I've played before, which would be easy but boring. I've done American plays before, but until now I have not been part of the playwright's process. I did 'Sister Mary Ignatius Explains It All for You,' but only after someone else had had the fun of working with Chris Durang. It's hard for me to do a play in New York, because I live in southern California and have children of varying age ranges, but this play is so intriguing and unusual that I couldn't pass it up. ''I also have this theory about acting - that it is like a muscle, which will atrophy if it is not regularly exercised,'' she continued. One of the fascinations of watching Ms. Moore, who just turned 50, and Ms. Redgrave, 43, perform together, is in seeing two women of vastly different backgrounds and temperaments merge into the same person. While Ms. Moore's Susan is more theatrical and openly sensual than Ms. Redgrave's Susan Too, it is the latter's reserves of sweetness, strength and subtle humor that help put together Ms. Moore's shattered world once Jake leaves her for a woman his own age. The interaction brings to mind the struggles - both personal and professional - that Ms. Moore and Ms. Redgrave have weathered.. In 1980, the year she won acclaim both for her movie portrayal of Beth, the unyielding mother in ''Ordinary People,'' and the hospitalized quadriplegic in the Broadway play, ''Whose Life Is It Anyway?'' Ms. Moore lost the only child of her first marriage when he accidentally shot himself. Her second marriage, to the television executive Grant Tinker, was also at an end. Ms. Redgrave grew up the youngest member and the shy, frightened ''ugly duckling'' of a famous theatrical family. Although her international success 20 years ago in the movie ''Georgy Girl,'' made her famous, it also typecast her in the public mind as a pudgy kook pushing a baby carriage. It is a stereotype that the svelte, elegant actress must combat even today, after having appeared on the New York stage in such varied and demanding vehicles as ''Black Comedy,'' ''Mrs. Warren's Profession,'' ''Aren't We All?,'' and ''Saint Joan.'' ''Saint Joan'' was directed by her husband and manager, John Clark, with whom she lives a comfortably rustic life, filled with children and animals, in the hills outside Los Angeles. Ms. Moore also has the mixed blessing of having to live up to an image that will never change so long as there are reruns of ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show'' - that of the ideal single career woman. Three years ago, Ms. Moore married her third husband, the New York cardiologist Robert Levine. . The couple recently bought a country house and two horses in upstate New York hunt country. Despite the failure of her television series ''Mary,'' Ms. Moore is planning another show for this coming fall. ''It will be character relationship comedy,'' Ms. Moore says, ''as opposed to one-joke comedy, which unfortunately was the style of the last go-round.'' On the stage, Ms. Moore and Ms. Redgrave have found a synchronicity that allows each to step into the other's shoes. ''One night I was late with an entrance because of a wardrobe change that didn't allow me enough time, and I missed it,'' Ms. Moore recalled. ''When I finally made it onstage, Lynn was saying my line. I pointed to her and said, 'Exactly,' and it worked. One night before the end of the run, we plan to make the grand experiment and swap roles.''
