790|1987\01\04|INCREASING QUANTITY IS SIMPLE FOR POPULAR HOUSE PLANTS|A well-grown spider plant (Chlorophytum comosum) will send out many runners with small plantlets at the ends. What is to be done about such undisciplined growth? Roote the plantlets and share the bounty.|A well-grown spider plant (Chlorophytum comosum) will send out many runners with small plantlets at the ends. What is to be done about such undisciplined growth? Roote the plantlets and share the bounty. A well-grown spider plant (Chlorophytum comosum) will send out many runners with small plantlets at the ends. What is to be done about such undisciplined growth? Roote the plantlets and share the bounty. This formation of plantlets is the spider plant's means of perpetuating itself. For gardeners, thses miniatures are an opportunity to learn one f the basics of plant propagation. Once this method is mastered, there are other ways to multiply house plants and bring new life to old ones tha have become straggly and overgrown. In the horitcultural world, the little spider plants on the ends of the runners are called offsets. All these plantlets need are roots to be on their own. In the wild this rooting would take place naturally when the plant runners touch soil. To make this rooting happen at home, you'll have to provide some encouragement. Set the spider plant on the floor or on a table and fill small pots with commercial potting mix. Water the pots thoroughly and drain them in the sink. Fill as many pots as there are little plantlets. * With the mother plant in the center, stretch out the runners to reacht he pots and fasten each plantlet on top fo the soil with a paperchip or large staple. But do not cut it off from the runner. Be sure to keep the soil int he satellite pots moist, but not soggy. In a few weeks, roots will form and the plantlets can be severed from the runners. Also each runner should be cut off from the mother plant. The older spider plant will look new and can be rehung and grown normally. Each rooted plantlet will match the mother plant in characteristics. Other house plants that send out runners with plantlets include episcias, strawberry begonias (Saxifragra stolonifera) and pick-a-back (Tolmiea menziesii). The same rooting methods apply. In the case of pick-a-back, which form plantlets on the tops of leaves, sever the leaf from the plant in insert leaf stem and plantlet in a pot filled with potting mixture. After roots form, the leaf will wither away. Some house plants form offsets which huddle close to the base of the parent plants rather than on long runners. Among them are bromeliads and clivias. These offsets can be separated from the parent plant and grown ont heir own, but they should not be cut off until they are about one-quarter the size of the parent. Use a sharp knife to sever them carefully and hopefully roots will be attached. * Some gardeners would rather remove the parent plant from its pot and lay it on its side for this operation. Then the offsets can be cut from the parent plant and potted individually. The main plant is returned to its pot with fresh soil. With either method, the offsets are potted individually in a quick-draining potting mixture. They will form a sturdy root system and can be grown as new plants. Mastery of these simple steps should encourage a novice to go on to more complicated plant propagation which includes rooting cuttings. Pieces can be taken from the stems of plants (tip cuttings) or stem sections of foliage plants can be placed horizontally on damp rooting media. New plants can also be encouraged to grow from leaves of begonias and African violets. Rooting cuttings is probably the most rewarding. In a way, it is also themost frustrating as there is not always 100 percent success. Some cuttings simply fail to root. A few basics apply to the propagation of common house plants. Rooted cuttings or slips will be identical to parent plants. This means of propagation secures the species as a clone and it is also faster. Many palnts do not form viable seed. If they do, seed has two disadvantages: it takes longer and it produces innumerable variables. Offspring of open pollinated seedlings are never identical. Most commercial foliage plant operations that depend on volume and time schedules rely on rooted cuttings to produce their stock fast. The tools needed for successful rroting of cuttings are a sharp knife to sever the cuttings from the parent plant, pots scrubbed clean, a light but no sunny location and a quick-draining rooting medium. As to the kinds of pots to use, either plastic or clay are fine as long as they have drainage holes. If the plastic pots do not have drainage holes, use a hot nail or screwdriver to punch holes in the bottoms or along the sides. For the rooting medium, perlite, an expanded form of volcanic rock, is used. It is full of tiny holes which hold water, resembles tapioca and is lightweight. Other gardeners prefer a heavier mixture of half coarse sand (never use fine beach sand) and peat moss. Commercial rooting mixes are also sold at garden centers. Before any cuttings are inserted, however, the rooting medium should be wetted thoroughly. Stems must never be inserted into a medium that is dry. As to the length of cuttings to take, there is no rule. Much depends on the mother plant and what kind of trimming it may need. Cuttings are usually anywhere from two to six inches long. Those of succulent-leaved plants such as coleus should be covered with wet paper towels to prevent wilting, while those of thick-leaved plants such as cacti, jade adn geraniums should be allowed to dry overnight before they are putinto the rooting medium. This drying will also help the callus, a kind of scab, to form over the wound and spur rooting. Commercial rooting hormone powders should not be necessary to spur rooting although those who root woody-stemmed house plants such as gardenia do find these powders helpful. Trim off the bottom leaves so the cutting stems are clean. Insert them gently but firmly and settle them inby using a fine mister to rewet the rooting medium. PolYethylene bags put over pots of cuttings hold moisture in and prevent them from drying out. And one final point. Don't be tempted to peek. The cuttings willk start to form new leaves when they are rooted. This will be time enough to open the plastic covering adn pot the cuttings individually.
