791|1987\01\04|OWNING A NEW BOAT CAN BE EASY AS READY, SET, SIGN|Financing a boat has never been easier. At the National Boat Show, 16 lenders have taken space, ready to write loans on new or used boats for as little as $3,000. Five years ago there were just a handful of lenders, and they wouldn't talk to you unless you were financing a new boat with a loan of more than $25,000.|Financing a boat has never been easier. At the National Boat Show, 16 lenders have taken space, ready to write loans on new or used boats for as little as $3,000. Five years ago there were just a handful of lenders, and they wouldn't talk to you unless you were financing a new boat with a loan of more than $25,000. Financing a boat has never been easier. At the National Boat Show, 16 lenders have taken space, ready to write loans on new or used boats for as little as $3,000. Five years ago there were just a handful of lenders, and they wouldn't talk to you unless you were financing a new boat with a loan of more than $25,000. Even though every kind of loan imaginable is being written, including variables, interest caps, floating rates and balloons, most smaller boat loans (under $25,000) are fixed-term, fixed-rate financing. Buyers want to know how their boat fits into their budget, without any surprises. This year, buyers may find that their monthly budget will enable them to finance a bigger boat. That's because interest rates have come down even lower, and boat loans are now being written for longer terms. Lower Monthly Payments Geraldine Waltz, an executive vice president of Essex Credit Corporation, says that at last year's boat show, she made loans at 11.5 percent for a maximum of 15 years. Financing $50,000 resulted in a monthly payment of $584.09. This year, she says, Essex is making loans for 20 years at 9.4 percent. Financing the same $50,000 this way brings the monthly payment down to $462.81. Bankers are learning to like boats. Unlike cars, boats don't depreciate rapidly. In fact, a 10-year-old fiberglass boat, routinely maintained, is probably selling for more today than it did in 1977. And bankers love boaters. Not only is the default rate far lower than for auto loans, but boat owners tend to be better potential bank customers. Greg Proteau, an executive director of the National Marine Bankers Association, says boat owners tend to have a better credit profile and a better net worth. Banks believe that by writing a boat loan, they will be able to sell the customer other bank services. Acting on that belief, Chemical Bank this year wrote a boat loan program tied into checking account services. Fierce Competition With the competition among lenders so fierce, it pays to shop around. ''With all the lenders at the boat show,'' Proteau says, ''you'll quickly get a feel for what is available.'' It may also pay to talk to your tax adviser. While the deductibility of consumer loan interest will be phased out by 1991, smaller boats can be financed, within limitations, as part of a home equity package, with the interest cost fully deductible. Some larger boats may qualify as a second residence. Arthur Goldstein, a tax manager at Arthur Young, quotes from the Internal Revenue Code regulations on vacation homes: ''The term dwelling unit includes . . . (a) boat . . . which provides basic living accommodations, such as sleeping space, toilet and cooking facilities.'' Howard Sample, a New York partner at Price Waterhouse, says Treasury Department regulations specifically cite the example of a ''boat suitable for overnight use.'' ''This is generally interpreted,'' he says, ''to mean a boat with a berth, a head and a galley.'' In other words, don't expect to qualify a 16-foot fishing boat just because you occasionally spend the night out trolling for blues. Sample points out that qualification as a second dwelling means that you can deduct both the interest cost and any personal property tax. He goes on to say that although there is no authority yet, you have a good argument that the interest cost on a condo boat slip would also qualify for exemption. In short, even though the sales tax deduction has been lost, boat owners have fared better than most taxpayers. Geraldine Waltz, of Essex Credit, thinks tax revision may help the boat industry. ''People who enjoyed boating but never owned a boat, may buy one now,'' she says. ''They've lost most of their other deductions.''  BOAT SHOW
