792|1987\01\04|IT'S PERTH: PUB-CRAWLS AND SANTA'S KANGAROOS|It was 10:30 on a Sunday morning, roughly when a New Yorker reaches for a second cup of coffee, as Kim Gibson ordered a beer at the Railway Pub and complained about her American ''protectors.''|It was 10:30 on a Sunday morning, roughly when a New Yorker reaches for a second cup of coffee, as Kim Gibson ordered a beer at the Railway Pub and complained about her American ''protectors.'' It was 10:30 on a Sunday morning, roughly when a New Yorker reaches for a second cup of coffee, as Kim Gibson ordered a beer at the Railway Pub and complained about her American ''protectors.'' ''It's a hassle walking around, because there are 50 American sailors at a corner, all asking you out to dinner,'' Miss Gibson, a physical therapist, said over her Swan beer. American sailors by the thousands regularly bound off their ships for shore leave in Perth. Mostly Navy men, and all instantly recognizable by their haircuts and accents, they prowl the pubs and shops for a few days before returning to sea. The Pentagon counts on ports and other installations in Australia, which have taken on greater importance recently. Events in the Philippines have raised doubts about the future of American bases there, while New Zealand has refused to allow nuclear-powered or nuclear-armed ships to call. That puts greater burdens on Australia, where the most frequent port of call for warships is Perth. Businesses love the free-spending visitors, and some other Australians seem equally enthusiastic. A welcoming service allowing families to offer home-cooked meals to young Navy men has been dubbed ''Dial-a-Sailor,'' because it is sometimes used by local women to get dates. Many Australians, like Miss Gibson, find this distasteful and say the sailors tend to be rude. This criticism was amplified when a guidebook to Australian iniquity, published by some sailors, was discovered and reprinted in part in local newspapers. Australia's anti-nuclear movement is concerned about nuclear-armed or -powered ships visiting Australian ports. Critics, particularly in the small Nuclear Disarmament Party, say that Australia's ties to the American Navy would make it vulnerable to nuclear attack in time of war. Aside from rare disturbances, most American sailors seem to leave a good impression. ''They're good blokes,'' said Phil Tapsell, a sporting goods salesman in Perth. ''You can get soused with them. Of course, it's different for a lady.'' Barbecues and Beaches It is summer in Australia, a gorgeous summer of sun and sand and clear blue skies. Despite campaigns against skin cancer, Australians are on the beaches in force, basting their skin with tanning oil as they barbecue themselves. It is illegal to bring the ''barbie'' to the beach, so after Australians are a chocolate brown, they retire to their backyards to throw steaks, sausages and onions on the grill. The surfing culture is giving way to wind-surfing, with young men and women using huge sails on surfboards to propel themselves at 20 or 30 miles an hour. Scores of bright sails color the vista in some bays. Color also comes from the zinc sunscreen creams that have become popular on the beaches. The white cream has largely given way to bright blue, red and yellow creams that adorn the noses of many young beach-goers. It is one of the few signs that Australians are concerned by the consequences of their reverence for the sun, including one of the highest rates of skin cancer in the world. Australian beachgoers may have bright red noses this time of year, but the reindeer do not. After a century of interpreting Christmas in traditional themes of snow, sleighs and a well-wrapped Santa, Australians are beginning to develop their own version of Christmas traditions. ''We're only just switching from Northern Hemisphere Christmas cards with Santa and snow and reindeer,'' said Malcolm Bryce, Western Australia's Deputy Premier. ''It doesn't snow here, and we don't have reindeer. So on cards we're now seeing kangaroos pulling sleighs instead of reindeer.'' Christmas Island, an Australian territory, went even further with a recent issue of postage stamps. They depict Santa Claus fishing, riding a power boat, relaxing in a deck chair and playing golf.
