793|1987\01\04|Car Makers Hop Aboard The Non-Truck Truck|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. IN the automobile business, the spotlight has turned to trucks. As sales of passenger cars have grown annually at a mere 2 percent over the past decade - barely keeping up with the increase in the nation's population - light-truck sales have almost doubled. They reached 4.8 million in 1986, up from 2.5 million in 1973. Forecasters say the trend will continue for the rest of the decade. But these days, a truck is not what a truck once was, a strictly commercial hauler of workmen and materials. Today's light trucks include mini-vans that transport children and groceries, pickups that are cheaper and more fun to drive than austere economy cars, and four-wheel-drive sports utility vehicles that combine the virtues of a station wagon with those of a Jeep. ''It's become a second car, a utility vehicle,'' said Robert C. Stempel, chief truck executive of the General Motors Corporation. ''Our customers like their performance and load-carrying capability as well as the passenger conveniences.'' Conveniences, indeed. Today's trucks come equipped with plush upholstery, power assists, air conditioning and fancy sound systems. Sizes have proliferated, as well. The Japanese started selling mini-pickups at mini prices when all the Big Three had to offer was their standard size - that is, big pickups. Now the pickups come in small, medium and large sizes, and new entrants, such as the Suzuki Samurai, a compact off-road vehicle, have found eager markets. In fact, their popularity with the general public is changing the way trucks are being designed. Market researchers estimate, for example, that four-wheel-drive ''off-road'' vehicles are taken off paved roads no more than 10 percent of the time. So when American Motors replaced its venerable Jeep CJ model with the Wrangler this year, the change was mostly to improve on-road handling. When the new G.M. full-size pickup is introduced in April, it will be described as ''dual purpose - a pickup for daytime work and nighttime play.''  HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
