794|1987\01\04|Oil's High-Risk Plays In Proven Reserves|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. THE big new poker game shaping up in the oil business is the buying and selling of proven domestic reserves. The market for proven reserves -deposits of oil known to be recoverable - was practically paralyzed during much of 1986 because of the sharp drop in oil prices earlier in the year - to less than $10 a barrel. Potential buyers were reluctant to pay anything over $6 a barrel for proven reserves, while most sellers were seeking substantially more. But the action is likely to pick up, now that prices are expected to stay above $16 a barrel, at least for the early months of 1987. (The new price outlook stems from OPEC's recent limited-production pact.) Buyers of proven reserves are starting to pay more. Sellers, meanwhile, seem willing to accept less; their hope that crude prices will top $20 a barrel in the near future has been dashed. A couple of the oil industry's better-known mavericks are already moving. In October, Robert O. Anderson, the 69-year-old retired chairman of Arco, joined forces with Roland W. Rowland, of Britain's Lonrho Group, to buy about 600 oil and gas properties in the Rocky Mountains and Southwest from Arco. The price was not disclosed, but Mr. Anderson said most of the $180 million that he and Mr. Rowland have allocated for buying American reserves will go toward the Arco properties. And in his latest play for proven reserves, T. Boone Pickens, the chairman of Mesa Limited Partnership, last month offered to buy the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, with its large reserves, for an estimated $2 billion in shares. He dropped the offer after Diamond threatened a court battle against him, though some analysts believe Mr. Pickens might renew his bid. Of course, like all plays in the oil business, the proven-reserve game carries high risks and big stakes. Investors who pick the right properties today ''will make themselves very wealthy in the long run,'' said Henry T. DeNero, a partner in Los Angeles with McKinsey & Company's energy consulting group. But, he adds, it may take another five years before the winners become apparent. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
