795|1987\01\04|REPORTER FIGHTS TESTIFYING AT TRIAL IN MURDERS|A New Hampshire newspaper reporter faces a charge of contempt of court if he refuses to show up in Maine on Monday and testify at a murder trial there.|A New Hampshire newspaper reporter faces a charge of contempt of court if he refuses to show up in Maine on Monday and testify at a murder trial there. A New Hampshire newspaper reporter faces a charge of contempt of court if he refuses to show up in Maine on Monday and testify at a murder trial there. The legal dispute grows out of interviews the reporter, Robert Hohler. conducted in June 1985 with Richard Steeves, who goes on trial Monday for two murders in Maine. At the time of the interviews, Mr. Steeves, who is now 43 years old, was in the New Hampshire State Prison forensic unit here. Mr. Hohler, who is also a columnist for The Concord Monitor, says he will not testify because he is appealing a New Hampshire court order that he testify at the trial in Knox County Superior Court in Rockland, Me. Article Sought as Evidence Mr. Hohler says he should not be forced to testify about statements, openly obtained from Mr. Steeves, that were published in an article in The Monitor. The Maine prosecutors want to use the article as evidence in their action against Mr. Steeves. ''The information contained in the article is sufficient evidence,'' said Assistant Attorney General Thomas Goodwin of Maine, ''but in order to put that information into the trial I need a witness.'' Although newspapers customarily fight to protect confidential sources, none of the information in the article was based on such sources. But The Monitor and Mr. Hohler argue that forcing the reporter to testify could cast him in the position of becoming an arm of the law. They say that the New Hampshire courts should tell the Maine authorities they should gather their own evidence rather than rely on information that journalists produce independently. Mr. Goodwin, the prosecutor, said it was essential for Mr. Hohler to testify if the article was to be submitted as evidence, because no one else was present at the interview. ''It's our duty to gather every bit of critical evidence, not to leave anything out,'' the prosecutor said. ''This may well be an essential piece of evidence.'' Court Session on Custody In a hearing here Friday in Merrimack County Superior Court, Justice Arthur Bean refused to have Mr. Hohler taken into custody, as Maine prosecutors had wanted. But the judge noted that he ordered on Dec. 30 that Mr. Hohler should testify in the Maine matter and that that order was still in effect because the New Hampshire Supreme Court had not yet decided to accept the appeal. Mr. Steeves is accused of the April 1984 slaying of Russell Bailey, 69, and Harry Staples, 83, who was killed in 1965. Both men lived in Wells, Me., not far from the New Hampshire border. Each killing in which Mr. Steeves was implicated, including some in the 1960's, involved beating, the police said; Mr. Bailey was also shot, but the bullet wound was not the cause of his death. In 1965, Maine prosecutors felt the evidence against Mr. Steeves in the Staples case was insufficient, but they now say they have enough evidence. The Maine Attorney General's office, in its effort to get Mr. Hohler to testify, forced him to appear in the New Hampshire court two weeks ago to be identified as the writer of the article. Deteained for 18 Years Before the interview, Mr. Steeves was incarcerated for nearly 18 years at the New Hampshire State Hospital forensic unit in Concord in connection with murders committed in the 1960's. He was released in 1984 on the basis of the authorities' assessment that he had recovered from mental problems and had become an example of recovery and rehabilitation. A year later he was back in custody. 'I Think I'm Innocent' In the article, published June 12, 1985, in The Concord Monitor, Mr. Steeves was quoted as saying: ''I'm not well enough to say what really happened. I think I'm innocent in one way, but in another way, I don't know. My mind's all screwed up.'' He was also quoted as telling Mr. Hohler, apparently speaking of the Bailey case: ''I think I saw someone else kill him, but on the other hand, I have a dream that I see myself doing it, I'm not sure. I do know the guy wasn't killed for money. He did something sexually, and somebody did something to him.''
