796|1987\01\04|PROGNOSIS GOOD AS THE PRESIDENT FACES OPERATION|President Reagan spent a quiet day at the White House today, on the eve of entering the hospital for two medical procedures: a colonoscopy on Sunday and prostate surgery on Monday.|President Reagan spent a quiet day at the White House today, on the eve of entering the hospital for two medical procedures: a colonoscopy on Sunday and prostate surgery on Monday. President Reagan spent a quiet day at the White House today, on the eve of entering the hospital for two medical procedures: a colonoscopy on Sunday and prostate surgery on Monday. Experts say the odds are high that the President will come through the two common procedures with no major difficulty, and it was business as usual for much of today as Mr. Reagan discussed the budget in his weekly radio address and signed the budget that will be delivered to Congress on Monday. Small Risk of Complication As of midnight tonight, the President will have nothing to eat or drink in preparation for the two procedures. On Sunday morning, he will take a 15-minute helicopter flight to the Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md. The colonoscopy and prostate operation are standard and safe, the experts say, though they add that small risks of complication are always present. A cancerous polyp was removed from Mr. Reagan's colon in 1985, and although major problems are not expected, cancer specialists point out that this is a critical period: when colon cancer reappears, often elsewhere in the body, more than two-thirds of the time it is within two years. The risk of detecting such recurrence at this checkup is estimated at about 5 percent. ''Something could show up,'' said Dr. Sidney J. Winawer, an expert in colon cancer at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. ''He certainly is in that period when it could.'' Another possibility - and again, the chances of its occurring are relatively small - is that doctors could unexpectedly find prostate cancer. Chances of discovering that are generally regarded as about 10 percent, and such a finding would not necessarily be ominous. A team largely from the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., will perform the procedures in conjunction with doctors from the White House, the Navy and private practice. Mr. Reagan is expected to return to the White House in midweek. The President, who will turn 76 next month, has undergone periodic cancer checkups at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center since his colon surgery. But the prostate surgery is a surprise. After Mr. Reagan underwent a two-hour urological examination for undisclosed symptoms last August, Dr. T. Burton Smith, then the White House physician, said the tests revealed ''no abnormalities'' or evidence of disease. X-Rays Are Scheduled Officials have not said what symptoms Mr. Reagan has experienced from his enlarged prostate, a condition called benign prostatic hypertrophy. Common ones are being awakened in the night to void urine, voiding smaller amounts but more frequently, and a sense of urgency to urinate. Doctors not connected with Mr. Reagan's case said that the chances are remote that Mr. Reagan's urinary symptoms are connected to any recurrence of the colon cancer. Such a recurrence would probably be painless, producing no symptoms, and most likely could be detected only through medical tests. Doctors have drawn blood samples from Mr. Reagan at the White House about every month for one such test, a CEA (for carcinoembryonic antigen), and the results are understood to have been continually normal. Many doctors, however, believe the CEA test is not always conclusive. The President is scheduled to have CAT scan X-rays of his abdomen and pelvis as well as a colonoscopy, a procedure in which a flexible fiberoptic tube is used to examine the entire length of the colon. This is particularly necessary in Mr. Reagan's case because his cancerous polyp, removed a year and a half ago, was located at the beginning of the colon, at its junction with the small intestine. The X-rays and colonoscopy are being done for different purposes. The CAT scans are primarily aimed at detecting any possible spread of Mr. Reagan's colon cancer to the the liver and the lymph nodes in the abdomen and pelvis. The colonoscopy, which will be performed by Dr. Robert W. Beart Jr. of the Mayo Clinic, is primarily to prevent further colon cancers by detecting and removing newly formed benign polyps. Doctors have come to believe that many benign polyps can become malignant and they have found that individuals who have one polyp are prone to form additional ones. Doctors have already removed five small benign colon polyps during the two colonoscopic procedures Mr. Reagan has undergone since his cancer operation. At that time, Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, who is chief of cancer surgery at the National Cancer Institute, said Mr. Reagan had a greater than 50 percent chance of outliving his cancer for five years, the standard period used to measure cancer survival, and some experts believe that the prognosis should have been stated more positively. But recurrence and spread of the colon cancer, if it did occur, could have ominous implications for Mr. Reagan's long-term survival. The British Medical Journal, noting the lack of an accurate way of detecting recurrent colon cancer at its earliest stage, said in an editorial: ''Many patients who die from cancer of the bowel have previously undergone what was hoped to have been a 'curative' resection, only to return with lethal recurrent or metastatic disease.'' The American Cancer Society estimates that colon cancer, which is the second leading cause of cancer death in the United States, killed 51,800 Americans last year. Awake During Prostate Surgery Assuming no serious problem arises from results of Mr. Reagan's tests Sunday, the prostate procedure will get under way about 9 A.M. Monday with an anesthetic injected between the vertebrae in the lower spine. A few minutes later, while Mr. Reagan remains awake, two urologists, Dr. David Utz of the Mayo Clinic and Dr. John Randolph Beahrs of St. Paul, Minn., who trained at Mayo, will begin what is called a trans-urethral resection of the prostate, or TUR. A long tube called a resectoscope will be inserted through the urethral opening to the prostate, a walnut-size gland that exists only in men and that surrounds the urethra, the tube that carries urine from the bladder. One urologist will look through a wide-angle lens at one end of the resectoscope to examine the lobes, or sections, of the enlarged gland. The instrument has an electric wire loop that the doctor, by pressing separate pedals with his foot, can use to chip away prostate tissue and to stop bleeding. The aim is to remove all of the obstructing portion. It is impossible to remove the entire prostate with the resectoscope; hence tissue can regrow and benign prostatic hypertrophy recur. Throughout the operation gallons of fluid will flow from bags hanging from a stand about two feet above Mr. Reagan to bathe and cleanse the operative field. In a separate step, the removed prostate tissue is flushed out and strained so that it can be examined for any signs of malignancy. Risk of Absorbing Fluid As is normally done, an anesthesiologist and other doctors will monitor heart rhythm and vital signs. They will also watch for mental confusion, which could be an indication of water intoxication from absorbtion of the bathing fluid. Doctors often monitor the amount of sodium in a patient's blood during or just after the operation; low sodium levels indicate that too much fluid was absorbed, and doctors inject a strong solution of salt water to correct the problem. The amount of fluid absorbed usually correlates with the length of the surgery, but this varies widely. If too much is absorbed, as occasionally happens, and it is not corrected, the resulting overload could cause not only temporary mental confusion but also heart failure and other potentially lethal problems. Seriousness of Prostate Cancer The time it takes to perform a TUR varies according to such factors as the size of the gland and the amount of bleeding - it usually takes less than an hour. As soon as the anesthetic wears off, usually in a few hours, Mr. Reagan will be able to move about. The trans-urethral resection carries small but significant risks of subsequent bleeding, infection, urinary incontinence and impotency. Bleeding usually stops after a few days, but in rare cases it recurs and can lead to serious complications such as a heart attack. When pathologists examine prostate tissue in men over 60, there is about a 10 percent chance that they will find cancerous cells. ''Statistically, the older you are when you have any kind of prostate surgery, the greater the chance of finding a cancer in the tissue removed,'' said Dr. Russell W. Lavengood, a urologist in New York City. The seriousness of the finding and its treatment would depend on the nature of the cells that pathologists see through the microscope. Such prostate cancers are commonly what are called well-differentiated cells, not particularly virulent and in small clusters. Such a situation ''is not dangerous'' because the cancers tend to be very slow-growing, said Dr. Mircea Golimbu, a urologist at New York University Medical Center. If cancer cells are found in the prostate, Mr. Reagan and his doctors will then face a decision that experts say is rooted more in philosophy than medicine. Statistically, men over 75 who have cancer of the prostate are more likely to die from some other cause, according to Dr. William Fair, who is chief of urology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Generally, Dr. Fair said, there are three options for patients with cancer of the prostate: to do nothing because it may grow so slowly as to constitute little danger; to treat with radiation, or to remove the entire prostate and surrounding lymph nodes. Generally speaking the medical community is optimistic about the President's health. Physicians who have cared for him have been struck by his resiliency, noting how well he came through chest surgery after he was shot and the colon operation. And Dr. Ralph Bookman, who gave Mr. Reagan allergy shots in Los Angeles last week, said: ''He looks remarkably well.''
