797|1987\01\04|No Room in Outer Space For Private Launchers|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. IN the year following the Challenger disaster, the question facing the commercial space industry is whether there will be a commercial space industry. Until Jan. 28, 1986, the day of the accident, the only thing clear about the nation's space-commercialization policy was that it revolved around the space shuttle. The shuttle was to serve as the primary means of getting commercial satellites into orbit. And its payload bay was the experimentation center for companies trying to make everything from perfect ball bearings to drugs in the weightlessness of space. At various times, entrepreneurs announced plans for private launching services. But most were grounded by their big competitor - the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. NASA, fearful of losing business for a shuttle system that was just barely cost-effective, kept the prices it charged for lofting payloads artificially low. Now, for the private-launching industry, it looks like the only thing worse than the presence of the shuttle is the absence of the shuttle. President Reagan's new space policy, which bars NASA from putting most commercial payloads on shuttle flights, would appear to give a green light to private launching efforts. But with no domestic launching capability in place, major satellite owners -like Comsat, Intelsat and Western Union - have been scrambling to get aboard Europe's Ariane flights. ''If there is room for an American competitor, and we think there may only be room for one, it could be whoever wins the MLV contract,'' said Brad Meslin of the Cambridge-based Center for Space Policy, referring to the Air Force's new medium-launch vehicle. The multibillion-dollar contact should be awarded in the next few months. And the winner - the contenders include Martin Marietta, Hughes Aircraft and McDonnell Douglas - will wind up with a production line in place, making it far cheaper to sell variants of the rocket for private satellite launchings. There is also a race on for another unmanned rocket: The Pentagon's ''heavy lift'' vehicle to take very large ''Star Wars'' payloads into orbit. Boeing has already proposed a craft that uses many of the features of the shuttle's propulsion system. Just how quickly American aerospace companies should jump into the fray, however, is unclear. Some are afraid of getting burned on Government programs that are later cut by Congress. And the demand for private launching services may decrease by 1993 as the sky fills with more than enough communciations-satellite capability, say several experts, making many wonder whether it is worth the investment. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
