799|1987\01\04|SPENDING CUTS IN MANY AGENCIES BUT RISE FOR NASA TO BE PROPOSED|President Reagan's new budget seeks to cut spending for the Departments of Education, Agriculture, Commerce, Energy, Interior and Transportation, but it would give a big increase to the space agency, according to confidential budget documents.|President Reagan's new budget seeks to cut spending for the Departments of Education, Agriculture, Commerce, Energy, Interior and Transportation, but it would give a big increase to the space agency, according to confidential budget documents. President Reagan's new budget seeks to cut spending for the Departments of Education, Agriculture, Commerce, Energy, Interior and Transportation, but it would give a big increase to the space agency, according to confidential budget documents. Mr. Reagan indicated today that he was prepared for a battle over the budget with the Democratic-controlled Congress. In his weekly radio address, he warned lawmakers: ''You can't have it both ways. You cannot decry deficits and then pass budget-busting legislation.'' Shortly after the address, he signed the budget he will submit to Congress Monday. It calls for spending $1,024.3 billion in the fiscal year 1988, which begins Oct. 1, and projects a deficit of $107.8 billion, just below the target set by law for the year. NASA Growing to $11 Billion In the last few days, education officials disclosed that Mr. Reagan would request a major increase in an experimental student loan program. But the budget documents show that the overall budget of the Education Department would decline steadily, from $16.8 billion this year to $14.7 billion in 1988 and eventually to $12.4 billion in 1992. According to the documents, the budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration would rise from $7.9 billion this year to $9.5 billion in 1988 and then would remain around $11 billion in each of the next four years. Space agency officials said some of the money was for a shuttle orbiter to replace the Challenger, which was destroyed last January. The budget also seeks more money for a manned space station and a small unmanned spacecraft to orbit Mars and look for water, the officials said. Increase for Nicaragua Battle Mr. Reagan will also ask Congress to increase the budget of the National Science Foundation, from $1.6 billion this year to $1.9 billion in 1988 and $2.2 billion in 1989, with further increases to $3.2 billion in 1992, the budget documents show. The agency supports research in science and engineering, which Administration officials say is important to America's competitive position in world markets. The budget documents also show that Mr. Reagan will ask Congress to provide $105 million in aid next year for the rebels trying to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua. That is $5 million more than the amount Congress provided for this fiscal year. The Administration apparently envisions a sustained commitment to the rebels, or contras, as they are known. The budget documents show spending of at least $110 million a year in aid to the contras from 1989 through 1992. ''We will not abandon the contras,'' James C. Miller 3d, director of the Office of Management and Budget, said in a television interview Friday. But lawmakers from both political parties have said Mr. Reagan should not expect to get any new aid for the rebels this year, at least until questions are answered about money sent to them from the sale of American weapons to Iran. Even some Administration officials have acknowledged the obstacles ahead. The budget, no longer a blueprint for action by Congress, has in recent years become, as Mr. Reagan said today in his radio address, ''a plan, a hope, a vision of what America is and of where America is going.'' Cut in Current Farm Spending Mr. Reagan calls for a 32 percent reduction over five years in the Agriculture Department budget, from $55.1 billion this year to $50.7 billion in 1988 and $37.6 billion in 1992, according to the documents. This cut would come at a time when American ''agriculture is in the worst recession since the 1930's,'' Representative E. (Kika) de la Garza, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Agriculture Committee, has said. The documents show that Mr. Reagan will also ask Congress to cancel spending already approved for this year for many rural assistance programs. In his radio address, Mr. Reagan said, ''We will spend more than ever for America's elderly, for law and drug enforcement, for AIDS research, for health care and for air traffic safety.'' Congressional staff members said they understood that Mr. Reagan would request $471 million for activities related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome in 1988, up from the $410 million appropriated by Congress for this year. These amounts include $286 million for biomedical research next year and $248 million this year. Later Increases for Energy None of those figures include costs that may be covered by Medicare or Medicaid, the health programs for elderly and disabled people and for the poor. Other documents show that Mr. Reagan wants to reduce the budget of the Commerce Department from $2.4 billion this year to $2.3 billion in 1988 and eventually to $1.9 billion in 1992. Spending by the Energy Department would decline slightly, from $10.6 billion this year to $10.2 billion in 1988 under Mr. Reagan's proposal. But it would rise in later years, in part because of additional spending related to nuclear weapons. The budget for ''atomic energy defense activities'' would rise from $7.4 billion this year to $7.8 billion next year and then to $9.6 billion in 1992. The Interior Department's budget, the documents show, would decline from $5.2 billion this year to $4.4 billion in 1988 and would remain around that level for the next four years. Spending by the Transportation Department would decline from $26.2 billion this year to $24.6 billion next year under Mr. Reagan's proposal. It would rise slightly in the next four years, but would not return to this year's level. Mr. Reagan will also ask Congress to cut spending by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Actual outlays would decline from $14.6 billion this year to $13.9 billion next year under his proposal. The department's legal authority to make loans and enter long-term contracts would be cut even more, from $14.2 billion this year to $10.2 billion in 1988. $2 Billion More for Star Wars For the Defense Department, Mr. Reagan proposes a major increase in spending for research, development, testing and evaluation of weapons, from $36.7 billion this year to $43.7 billion in 1988. These figures include a $2 billion increase for the Strategic Defense Initiative for a space-oriented defense against nuclear missiles, popularly called ''Star Wars.'' Under Mr. Reagan's request, the program would get $5.2 billion next year. The budget documents show no major increase in spending on military research and development from 1989 through 1992, but the budget for buying weapons and military equipment, after declining from $85.8 billion this year to $84 billion next year, would rise rapidly, to $94.6 billion in 1989 and to $123.3 billion in 1992. Members of Congress from both parties have already indicated that Mr. Reagan is unlikely to receive all he seeks for Star Wars. The budget documents show that Federal spending on food stamps would decline from $12.7 billion this year to $12.5 billion next year under Mr. Reagan's request. The budget for the Commodity Supplemental Food Program, which provides food to pregnant women and young children from low-income families, would decline from $41.5 million this year to $34.9 million next year. Federal spending on a program under which schoolchildren from low-income families receive milk free or at a reduced price would decline from $19.5 million this year to $2.2 million next year, the documents show. Other child nutrition programs would decline from $4.1 billion this year to $3.7 billion next year. Congress has resisted similar proposals in the last five years.
