80|1987\01\01|Office Pool, 1987|Once more unto the breach, dear friends, predicting the headlines of the coming year. Last year I was spot-on about the collapse of oil prices, wrong about the control of the Senate and almost everything else. Those who bet on the predictions made here last year are the object of snickering at their political naivete and envy at their new riches.|Once more unto the breach, dear friends, predicting the headlines of the coming year. Last year I was spot-on about the collapse of oil prices, wrong about the control of the Senate and almost everything else. Those who bet on the predictions made here last year are the object of snickering at their political naivete and envy at their new riches. Once more unto the breach, dear friends, predicting the headlines of the coming year. Last year I was spot-on about the collapse of oil prices, wrong about the control of the Senate and almost everything else. Those who bet on the predictions made here last year are the object of snickering at their political naivete and envy at their new riches. Multiples, start your choices: 1. The world leader leaving the scene in 1987 will be (a) France's staggering Jacques Chirac; (b) Britain's Margaret Thatcher, too confident of whipping Labor's Neil Kinnock; (c) Corazon Aquino, jinxed by a Time cover; (d) Mikhail Gorbachev, shoved aside by Yegor Ligachev for throwing stones in a glasnost. 2. The new household name made famous by the Iran contra-temps will be (a) Gen. John Singlaub; (b) Roy Furmark; (c) Gen. Richard Secord; (d) Duane Clarridge. 3. Israeli-American relations will (a) improve as the sponsorship of the arms dealings by Saudis and Canadians becomes known; (b) suffer when an Israeli officer becomes a target of American prosecutors in the Pollard spy case; (c) be tested as Oliver North tries to pin the blame on David Kimche for the fund diversion. 4. The main Democratic problem will become (a) Mario Cuomo's ignorance of foreign affairs issues; (b) a voter backlash against Democrats for ''losing'' Central America after abandoning the contras; (c) Gary Hart's widening lead making the nomination race look dull; (d) Sam Nunn's inability to express heavy compassion for society's losers. 5. The main Republican problem will become (a) the cognitive dissonance following the moderates' rush to Bob Dole as hard-line, anti-Sandinista diehards turn to George Bush; (b) the Dole sense of humor about his support of subsidized grain sales to Moscow; (c) the inexplicable hurricane following ''the Robertson Curse''; (d) Jack Kemp's reluctance to heed the nautical maxim ''When the water reaches the upper level, follow the rats.'' 6. The historic event of the year will be (a) turmoil in China following Maoist resentment of mild repression of freedom-demanding students; (b) turmoil in the Soviet Union as the forces of change lose control; (c) turmoil in the U.S. as the President and Vice President are staggered by scandal; (d) turmoil in South Africa as black revolution begins; (e) the eerie lack of turmoil anywhere. 7. Hot political vogue verb of the year will be (a) immunize; (b) sharing; (c) distance oneself; (d) outcompete. 8. White House chief of staff at year-end will be (a) Don Regan; (b) Baker, James or Howard; (c) Paul Laxalt; (d) Drew Lewis; (e) Cap Weinberger. 9. A weakened Presidency will result in (a) Democratic insistence on a tax increase as the price for S.D.I.; (b) Soviet toughness in arms reduction negotiations to capitalize on President Reagan's need for a deal; (c) Soviet acceptance of space-defense testing rather than postpone a deal well into the next Presidency; (d) a Republican turn toward Jeane Kirkpatrick as nominee. 10. The new C.I.A. chief will be (a) an intelligence pro not known to the general public, like Gen. William Odom; (b) a trusted figure to restore credibility in the coming maelstrom, like William Webster of the F.B.I.; (c) a sitting senator, like Malcolm Wallop of Wyoming. 11. The sleeper best seller among the politerati will be (a) Michael Deaver's loyalist memoir of the Reagans; (b) Jenifer Harvey Lang's fearless ''Tastings: the Best From Ketchup to Caviar'' (Crown); (c) Jane Nevins's timely ''Toward 200: the Constitution and its Celebration'' (Richardson & Steirman); (d) Sam Donaldson's ''Hold On, Mr. President!'' (Random House), its title gaining an unintended double meaning. 12. The economic scenario will be (a) under 2 percent real growth, interest rates up, stock market down; (b) better growth, rates down, market up; (c) 5 percent growth, boom; (d) no growth, bust. 13. Replacing Paul Volcker at the Fed will be (a) a banker like William Butcher of Chase, or Gerald Corrigan or Karen Horn of the Fed; (b) an economist like Fed vice chairman Manuel Johnson, Alan Greenspan, Beryl Sprinkel or Martin Anderson; (c) George Shultz, the independent-minded team player accused of being a loner by huddled professional loners; (d) Donald Regan, who now might be willing to accept a demotion. 14. Resolutely serving in the Oval Office next year at this time will be (a) Ronald Reagan; (b) George Bush; (c) James Wright. My picks: c, c, b, a, a, a, d, b, c, c, a, a, d, a. You gotta play to lose. ESSAY
