800|1987\01\04|LONG SHOTS 1, 2 IN TROPICAL RACE|The trail to the Kentucky Derby began in ragged fashion today as the long shots Baldski's Star and Manhattan's Woody led the order of finish in the $233,200 Tropical Park Derby for 3-year-olds at Calder Race Track.|The trail to the Kentucky Derby began in ragged fashion today as the long shots Baldski's Star and Manhattan's Woody led the order of finish in the $233,200 Tropical Park Derby for 3-year-olds at Calder Race Track. The trail to the Kentucky Derby began in ragged fashion today as the long shots Baldski's Star and Manhattan's Woody led the order of finish in the $233,200 Tropical Park Derby for 3-year-olds at Calder Race Track. Baldski's Star, a 9-1 shot, was second most of the way, took the lead leaving the backstretch and extended it into a 2 1/4-length victory despite running his final furlong in almost 14 seconds. Manhattan's Woody, dismissed at 37-1, outdueled Schism, the 7-2 second choice, by a nose for second place, and Schism's stablemate, Bourgeois, was a head back farther back in fourth. Uncle Cam, the George Steinbrenner-owned 9-5 favorite, was forced wide and finished a dull seventh in a field of 13. Only a length separated the second through eighth finishers, and the others were strung out far up the track. The winner, a Florida-bred son of Baldski and the Nashville mare Nashantess, paid $20.80 for $2 and covered the mile and an eighth under Craig Perret in a moderate 1:54 4/5 over the slow and sandy Calder track. Owned by the Five Star Stable and trained by Manuel Estevez, Baldski's Star was winning for the fourth time in eight career starts. The first three finishers all prepped in divisions of the What a Pleasure Stakes here Dec. 21. Baldski's Star won the slower division while Schism beat Manhattan's Woody by a length in a split that went four-fifths of a second faster. Tropical Park Derby Jinx The Tropical Park Derby is the first Triple Crown prep of the year and the first graded stakes for 3-year-olds. No Tropical Park Derby winner has gone on to glory in the spring classics but such also-rans as Creme Fraiche and Proud Truth blossomed later in the year. One race earlier, Arctic Honeymoon, a claimer at Belmont just three months ago, scored his third straight Florida victory with a 1 1/2-length upset decision over Smile in the $167,500 Tropical Park Breeders' Cup Handicap. The winner, a new horse since being turned over to the trainer, Luis Olivares, rallied from far back to nail the even-money favorite inside the final furlong. Smile, making his first start since winning the Breeders' Cup Sprint Nov. 1, held second place by nine lengths over Darn That Alarm. The winner carried 114 pounds, 8 fewer than Smile, and set a track record of 1:59 3/5 under Robert lester for the infrequently used distance of a mile and three-sixteenths. Today's rich races began a cluster of major stakes races that conclude the Calder meeting. The Sunday feature is the $200,000 La Prevoyante Invitational Handicap, at a mile and a half on the grass for 14 older fillies. Bonne Ile, who won the Yellow Ribbon at Santa Anita Nov. 2, carries top weight of 121 pounds, 5 more than Lotka and Carotene. Calder closes with the $200,000 McKnight Handicap Wednesday, the males' equivalent of the La Prevoyante. Flying Pidgeon will be favored to win the race for a third straight year. Hialeah opens its 50-day meeting Thursday, highlighted by the Flamingo Stakes Feb. 28, the first Grade I Derby prep of the year. HORSE RACING
