801|1987\01\04|ELECTRONIC GEAR PUTS HELM A TOUCH AWAY|Almost no segment of the marine field is as exciting as that of today's electronics. Microcomputer technology has stepped aboard, and if the products on display at this year's National Boat Show are any indication, technology is here to stay.|Almost no segment of the marine field is as exciting as that of today's electronics. Microcomputer technology has stepped aboard, and if the products on display at this year's National Boat Show are any indication, technology is here to stay. Almost no segment of the marine field is as exciting as that of today's electronics. Microcomputer technology has stepped aboard, and if the products on display at this year's National Boat Show are any indication, technology is here to stay. This year's trends are more evolutionary than revolutionary. The marine computer continues to be one of the hottest pieces of electronics gear, and manufacturers appear to be making an effort to introduce new, easier-to-use designs and improve existing ones. In addition to growing smaller, less expensive and more user-friendly, electronics equipment has gotten smarter. Integrated systems allow complete interfacing between most modular instrumentation on board, and with compact liquid crystal display (LCD) and analog sensors, the navigator can have all the information he needs at his fingertips, whether he is at the helm, at the nav station or up on the bridge. Instrumentation that existed as recently as five years ago was too esoteric, bulky, costly or unreliable, but now is within the financial and operational means of the average boat owner. There are several manufacturers of marine computers, many of whom are exhibiting their wares at this year's show. Most units provide certain standard informational fare, such as depth, speed, distance, wind speed, apparent wind speed and angle, velocity made good and magnetic heading. Some units offer clocks that read in nautical time; speed and distance averaging, water temperature, depth and anchor alarms and, for racers, a countdown timer that automatically computes minutes and seconds left till the start. On exhibit this year from Plastimo is the Saiing Computer, which processes navigational information and acts as a ''tactician,'' letting the helmsman know when to tack or what course to steer to best advantage. Like most other computers, the main unit can be extended with remote digital repeaters and can interface with other navigational equipment such as SatNav. The price is $1,650, with additional remote units available at added cost. From Brookes and Gatehouse is another new computer for sailors, the Hercules 390. This system delivers up to 62 channels of information, including tidal set and drift, target boat speed and optimum wind angle. Prices range from $4,795 for the Basic Pack to $6,995 for the more elaborate model. Other systems that can be seen at this year's show are the Link 5000 and Link 6000 from Datamarine and the Smart Pak from Signet Scientific. Applicable for both power and sail, these units provide a wealth of navigational data on one main screen. All have the ability to interface with modular remote display units that can be added according to the whim or budget constraints of the buyer. A key word in computerized high-tech gear this year is ''interface.'' Worthy of note are instruments that will interface between navigational receivers and various types of autopilots. International Marine Instruments is showing their new Windvane Converter. This device provides the interface between Kenyon Microline Wind Systems and Autohelm autopilot systems, enabling the masthead-mounted wind vane to transfer the information to the autopilot and steer the sailboat either to apparent wind angle or compass course. The price for the system is $1,447. This year's developmental trends are also evident in the more complex navigational gear that is on exhibit. Apelco Marine Electronics, a division of Raytheon, has added an interesting feature to one of its newest compact loran sets, called ''Loran-See.'' The set provides a LCD chart of the coastline, including landmarks and navigational aids. The user's boat appears on the screen as a blinking symbol. With a cursor, markers can be placed on the screen to indicate waypoints or other chart markings. A dotted trail appears astern to mark the boat's path. The cursor can also be used to draw a course. The cost is $1,395. The computerization of marine electronics has even filtered down to traditionally more back-to-basics navigational instruments. One such notable new product, which can also be seen at the I.M.I. booth, is the Lokata 7 handheld radio direction finder (RDF). This little piece of gear is a perfect example of design evolution. BOAT SHOW
