802|1987\01\04|Rural America's Absentee Landlords|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. AS the farm crisis forces more and more farmers to give up their land, the turmoil is producing an unexpected twist: growth in absentee ownership. Investment-minded doctors in Des Moines and lawyers in Chicago, hoping that the agricultural cycle has bottomed out, are buying up land. While they wait for land prices to rise, these investors are renting out the land to farmers, some of whom already have their own farms, some of whom are merely tenant farmers. ''Iowa land that once sold for $2,500 an acre now goes for $800, which enables these investors to make a decent rate of reurn,'' said John A. Schnittker, a former Under Secretary of Agriculture. Overcapacity in rural America is making this absentee ownership possible. With the nation's grain exports having plummeted since the glory days of the 1970's, agricultural overcapacity has resulted in dismally low grain prices. This is slowly and painfully squeezing out marginal operators. The shakeout will cause the number of commercial farmers to fall to 450,000 in five years, down from 600,000 now, says Mr. Schnittker. If there is a silver lining to all this, it is that the upheaval will force American farm goods, helped by the weaker dollar, to become more competitive on world markets: Farmers who survive will be able to produce at lower prices. Still, no one expects agricultural America to make great strides over the next few years in regaining lost market share in the global grain trade - unless there are major commodity shortages in China, the Soviet Union or elsewhere. Much capacity has been added in competing countries like Brazil and Australia. And many nations are heavily subsidizing their farm sectors, though there will be stepped-up pressure to reduce those subsidies in future trade talks. Says John K. Hosemann, senior economist with the American Farm Bureau: ''We built this mess we're in over six to eight years, and it will probably take six to eight to work it out.''  HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
