803|1987\01\04|Food Processors Look For Profits in Fish|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. FISH will be the big rage in food this year, in large part because of its reputation for being low in cholesterol and calories. Though meat and poultry will hold their central roles in the American diet, per-capita fish consumption is expected to climb to almost 15 pounds this year, up from 12.8 pounds in 1980. The National Fisheries Institute reports that the value of annual seafood sales is already approaching $20 billion. And fish entrees already bring supermarkets $860 million a year. Now food processors will try to make those numbers even bigger, as they concentrate on both the high and low ends of the fish market. Some companies will try to get more profit per ounce by marketing fish entrees as specialty foods that command premium prices. Gerard's Haute Cuisine, for example, a Vermont caterer with retail outlets in some large department stores like Bloomingdale's in New York, is offering vacuum-packed poached salmon and grouper-creole entrees for up to $7 a portion. Other processors will offer new -and in some cases, lower-priced -products. A Japanese process called surimi creates imitations of crab, lobster and other expensive seafoods from lower-cost fish. Consumers are beginning to accept the imitations and even some non-fish eaters are beginning to try surimi-based foods in which the fish is well disguised. One example is ''crab'' stuffed pasta shells. Demand for surimi - both imported and domestic - is expected to reach 200 million pounds this year, up from just 3 million pounds in 1980. Consumption of cold-water fish, such as herring, is also expected to rise sharply this year, as the major drug companies begin their aggressive promotions of fish oil as a dietary supplement. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
