804|1987\01\04|Airline Acquisitions Go International|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. THE nation's large airlines will look for new takeover candidates in the coming year, even though they have not fully digested some of the acquisitions they made during hectic 1986. But much of this year's action is likely to shift from the domestic to the international arena. Carl C. Icahn, who took control of Trans World Airlines in 1985 and who is now its chairman, already is talking with airlines about possible mergers or acquisitions. And if financially ailing Pan American World Airways puts its North Atlantic routes on the block - as is widely expected - the auction likely would attract a slew of bidders. Almost certainly Frank Lorenzo, chairman of the Texas Air Corporation, would be among them. Mr. Lorenzo, who is still struggling to digest his '86 takeovers of Eastern Airlines and People Express, is not one to let a bargain go by. The prices he paid for Eastern, $676 million, and for People, $115 million, were rock bottom. Delta Air Lines is another possible bidder. Despite its acquisition of Western Airlines in 1986, it lacks the size and resources of Texas Air, which has begun to compete directly with Delta in its prime Eastern routes. And Texas Air's bigger size and resources enable it to offer greater frequency of flights and more connections from its hubs. One way for Delta to get an edge would be to buy Pan Am's international routes -or buy a domestic airline. United Airlines, which bought Pan Am's Pacific routes last year is another potential bidder for Pan Am's Atlantic routes. Such an acquisition would make it the dominant international carrier in all three of the world's major markets - the United States, Europe and the Far East. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
