807|1987\01\04|INVESTIGATORS SEEK TO SOLVE MANY PUZZLES IN HOTEL FIRE|Investigators tried today to narrow the search for answers to the many puzzling questions concerning the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel.|Investigators tried today to narrow the search for answers to the many puzzling questions concerning the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel. Investigators tried today to narrow the search for answers to the many puzzling questions concerning the New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel. On one question at least, Federal arson investigators said that no evidence of structural damage consistent with a bomb had been uncovered. The possibility of a planted bomb was uppermost in the minds of many hotel guests who reported hearing two or three ''explosions'' emanating from the hotel in the first minutes of the fire. The police said today that they had been warned of a bomb threat or other form of assault at the hotel on Wednesday, just 90 minutes before the fire broke out. But the comments of the Federal investigators seemed to cast doubt on that theory. Three days after the fire, many other questions remain unanswered over the sequence of events leading up to the calamity, its cause and what transpired in the fateful minutes after it was first discovered. Arson or Negligence?  At the heart of the mystery is whether the fire was set or if it was an accident, one perhaps caused by negligence. If it was set, what was the motive and what consequence was desired? If it was by negligence, what conditions contributed to it and what individuals could be held liable as a basis of claims against the hotel's designers or its owners? Political terrorism by anti-American, pro-independence groups has generally been directed against government and military installations or personnel in Puerto Rico, not average citizens or tourists. Yet Puerto Rican terrorists have been behind indiscriminate acts of terrorism on the mainland United States, most notably the January 1974 lunchtime bombing of the Fraunces Tavern in Manhattan in which five patrons were killed and 80 injured. Political and tourism leaders in Puerto Rico have been quick to say there was no political motive behind the Dupont Plaza disaster. But Federal investigators will not discount a possible link until they have a chance to take a close look at the bitter labor dispute at the hotel. Investigators will almost certainly want to question Jorge Farinacci, a San Juan lawyer who was negotiating a labor contract with the hotel on behalf of Local 901 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, which represents 250 of the hotel's workers. Was at Meeting at Hotel Mr. Farinacci was at a meeting of about 100 union members in the hotel's beach-level ballroom at 3 o'clock Wednesday afternoon to discuss a last-minute contract offer before a midnight strike deadline, according to the hotel management. Mr. Farinacci is currently free on $1 million bail after his indictment in 1985 on a Federal charge growing out of the 1983 robbery of $7 million from a Wells Fargo depot in West Hartford, Conn. Twelve other defendants in that case have been linked to Los Macheteros, described by Federal officials as a Puerto Rican terrorist outfit. Los Macheteros has taken responsibility for several terrorist attacks, including the 1979 machinegun attack on a Navy bus in Puerto Rico that killed two sailors and wounded 10 others. Mr. Farinacci has denied any connections with terrorists. ''We want this fire to be investigated as fully as possible since we are dealing with a national tragedy,'' Mr. Farinacci said today. ''Only a madman would deliberately do something like this.'' Dupont Plaza officials said the fire broke out in the downstairs ballroom immediately after the close of the union meeting, in which last-minute negotiating strategy had been discussed. Bomb threats, work slowdowns and other acts of harassment have been tactics employed against hotels in past Puerto Rican labor disputes that have dragged on beyond the normal arbitration process and deteriorated into enmity, distrust and conspiracy. These tactics are designed to place economic pressure on the hotel to settle the dispute or suffer the consequences when guests complain about bad service or fear that their personal safety is being compromised. Chronic Shortage of Towels A guest who survived the Dupont Plaza fire said that in the week preceding it he and others had been made acutely aware of the labor dispute and the impending New Year's strike deadline. Many guests recalled a chronic shortage of towels, which could have been a result of a work slowdown or just a condition of what happens when a 423-room hotel is fully booked in a holiday week. ''Some of the other guests wanted us to complain to the management to bring pressure to settle the strike,'' said Jerry Kipnis, a 30-year-old psychiatric resident from Milwaukee. Other guests said they had heard dark hints of trouble from the staff. ''People wanted to check out and go to other hotels, but everything else was fully booked,'' said Christine Ryan, a Manhattan designer of financial software. Many people interviewed since the fire reported that the union had predicted trouble on New Year's Eve at the hotel. In fact, radio commercials and handbills paid for by the union gently advised guests and others planning to attend the New Year's Eve ball in the penthouse restaurant on top of the 22-story structure that labor problems at the hotel meant they could not expect to get quality service or entertainment in return for their money that night. There was no menacing tone to the messages, according to those familiar with them. What was menacing was two earlier fires - one on the evening of Dec. 27 and one the following afternoon - that appeared to have been set. The fire on Dec. 28 was discovered among furniture stored in a ninth-floor room, according to guests, and it disrupted the hotel and prevented many guests from returning to their rooms until later that night. There are conflicting reports as to how far the hotel management pressed for an official effort to track down the arsonists. But the management did hire 30 additional security guards to patrol each floor of the hotel to prevent a repeat of the arson. In that case, was the beach-level floor of the hotel, where the ballroom and adjacent kitchen were located, seen as an area where a smokey fire would go undetected until it had a chance to spread? Convinced of a Plot Surviving guests said they were convinced the fire had been plotted by the staff since they observed workers leaving their posts about a half hour before the bombs exploded. What they apparently saw, and after the fire gave great meaning to, were those staff members leaving the bars and restaurants to attend the union meeting in the ballroom. Then there is the question of explosions. Nearly everyone who was in the vicinity of the public ground floors of the hotel and pool patio recalled hearing ''explosions.'' They also said the smell of smoke preceded the explosive sounds by some minutes. Whether the fire ignited volatile materials that exploded or created a firestorm of heat that blew out large plate glass widows around the building with explosive force is still being investigated. The authorities say the hotel had been cited in the past by the Commonwealth Environmental Protection Agency for the improper maintenance and storage of fuels used in the building. Union officials said these fuels in past cases had leaked and infiltrated into sewer lines on the grounds of the hotel.
