808|1987\01\04|CHILD-CARE SERVICES CITED AS INADEQUATE BY STATE COMMISSION|Child-care services in New York State fail to meet the needs of youngsters requiring supervision and are more expensive than poor parents can afford, a state commission reported yesterday.|Child-care services in New York State fail to meet the needs of youngsters requiring supervision and are more expensive than poor parents can afford, a state commission reported yesterday. Child-care services in New York State fail to meet the needs of youngsters requiring supervision and are more expensive than poor parents can afford, a state commission reported yesterday. The conclusions were essentially the same that the panel, the Commission on Child Care, came to in its first report a year ago. The commission said that between 830,000 and 1.2 million preschool and school-age children need supplementary care during the hours their parents or other responsible household members are out of the home. ''In sharp contrast to the number of children in need of care,'' the commission said, ''there are fewer than 135,000 licensed day care spaces available statewide.'' Because of the ''huge disparity'' between supply and demand, the commission said, ''it must be concluded that hundreds of thousands'' of children in the state are either being cared for in unlicensed or unregulated centers or are ''caring for themselves for a substantial portion of the day.'' Attention was recently focused on unlicensed family day care when a fire broke out in a Brooklyn day-care home in November, killing two children and injuring six others. The cause of the fire has not yet been determined and is still under investigation. The 110-page report was prepared by the 54-member commission under the co-chairmanship of Matilda Cuomo, the Governor's wife, and Judith Avner, director of the New York State Division for Women. The report said the bulk of unregulated care appeared to be in family day care homes. Only 10 to 30 percent of such homes are regulated.
