809|1987\01\04|Computer Makers Must Sell 'Connectivity'|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. STILL battling a slump that most experts expected would be long over by now, America's computer makers will probably use 1987 as a year to consolidate, retrench and somehow convince buyers that it once again makes sense to go out and purchase computers. In a business world now dominated by computer sophisticates, such persuasion may prove increasingly tough. Except for those corporations that own mainframes, most commercial buyers are now considering the installation of second- and third-generation office computer systems. But for the past year or so, they have been holding off: Buyers today are looking to get more out of the hundreds of thousands of personal computers and minicomputers now in place before they go on another shopping spree. As for those hungry for more power, they want assurances that their new equipment will not prove obsolete as they struggle to install computer-communication networks. If a few years ago the spoils went to computer makers with the most innovative hardware and software, now they seem far more likely to go to companies with the best networking - ''connectivity'' - and related price-performance. Enter the International Business Machines Corporation. As industry-watchers are busy with predictions that the company will revamp its line of personal computers to make them more powerful, the product to watch this year is probably I.B.M.'s fledging local-area network. Like many of its competitors, I.B.M. has discovered that it is far more difficult to build seamless networks connecting personal computers to minicomputers and to mainframes than the company ever imagined. Whether customers adopt I.B.M.'s solution to the problem could be a key indicator of how difficult the road ahead is for the industry's biggest player. The same problem faces Unisys (the new name for the Sperry-Burroughs combination), which this year must establish that it now has the clout to attract new customers rather than just service old ones. Worried as most American computer makers are about 1987, they can take solace in the fact that the Japanese are in just as bad shape. Japan's semiconductor makers are losing tens of millions of dollars each quarter, and it seems unlikely that this will change until the third or fourth quarter. The Japanese are just now starting to focus the bulk of their research and development effort in software, something I.B.M., and to a lesser degree its competitors, have been doing for some time now. ''We went into this decade worried only about Japan,'' said one I.B.M. executive recently. ''We're leaving it trying to clean up the problems left by our own success.''  HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
