810|1987\01\04|Interest Rates May Inch Down Further|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent.|THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. THE outlook for the economy in 1987 looks all-too-familiar: another sluggish year with worries about too much debt and too little growth to drive the unemployment rate much below today's 6.9 percent. But behind the standard forecast for another standard year is an American economy still churning with change. The merger wave is continuing to roil key industries. Slow, or non-existent, growth and falling prices are forcing some sectors into a new pragmatism. In oil, commercial real estate and agriculture, owners are becoming more willing to sell out at what seem to be fire-sale prices. In entertainment, hard-nosed business executives are cutting costs. With all this, short-term interest rates are likely to dip even further as the Federal Reserve pours money into an economy limping into its fifth expansionary year. What follows is a look at what could prove to be some of the more interesting sectors by business and economic correspondents of The New York Times. WITH the economy facing another sluggish year, short-term interest rates are likely to continue heading downward in 1987 - perhaps dropping another half-percentage point, to around 5 percent during the first six months of 1987. But investor fears that inflation will push up interest rates in the future will keep longer-term interest rates near their current levels of around 7 1/2 percent. The key issue, of course, is the Federal Reserve's perception of how the economy is doing. At this point, despite rising commodity prices, the Fed is compelled to view recession as a bigger threat than inflation. Fresh on the policymakers' minds is the experience in Texas, where energy-industry problems spilled over into real estate and eventually rocked some of the nation's biggest and once-most-profitable banks. With agriculture, real-estate and much heavy industry still under severe pressure, the Fed will give top priority to assuring that the scenario in the Southwest will not be repeated in the overall economy. Thus, the central bank is much more likely to keep a generous amount of money flowing into the economy than to step on the brakes. And this could mean another cut in the discount rate within the next few months. HOW INDUSTRIES WILL FARE IN 1987
