811|1987\01\04|MANUEL IS ACTIVATED IN TIME TO FACE 49ERS|The Giants activated Lionel Manuel, their best wide receiver, today a day before their first game of the playoffs. He will be in uniform when the Giants (14-2) meet the San Francisco 49ers (10-5-1) at 12:30 P.M. Sunday.|The Giants activated Lionel Manuel, their best wide receiver, today a day before their first game of the playoffs. He will be in uniform when the Giants (14-2) meet the San Francisco 49ers (10-5-1) at 12:30 P.M. Sunday. The Giants activated Lionel Manuel, their best wide receiver, today a day before their first game of the playoffs. He will be in uniform when the Giants (14-2) meet the San Francisco 49ers (10-5-1) at 12:30 P.M. Sunday. Manuel sprained his left knee against the New Orleans Saints in the fourth game of the season and spent the remaining 12 games on injured reserve. After his injury, the Giants' passing game suffered until Bobby Johnson, Stacy Robinson and the reacquired Phil McConkey started alternating heroics. To make room for Manuel, the Giants placed John Washington, a rookie defensive end, on injured reserve with back spasms. Washington, a third-round draft choice, had played in all 16 regular-season games, mostly on special teams. Now he is ineligible for the Giants' potential remaining games -the National Conference championship the following Sunday against the Washington Redskins, who upset the Bears in Chicago today, and Super Bowl XXI two weeks after that. The Giants won their last nine games, including a ringing 21-17 victory over the 49ers in San Francisco five weeks ago, en route to the Eastern Division championship. After that loss to the Giants, the 49ers won their last three games en route to the Western Division title. The Giants eliminated the 49ers, 17-3, in a wild-card playoff game a year ago at Giants Stadiuim. But despite their recent success against the 49ers, the Giants are generally favored by only 3 points, and that represents the home-field advantage. The game seems to boil down to which team can stop the other team's imposing weapons - Joe Morris's running for the Giants and Joe Montana's passing for the 49ers. Yet even that is an oversimplification because five weeks ago Montana kept completing passes against the Giants and his team lost and Morris was shut down and his team won. In that game, the 49ers used basically an eight-man front against Morris, and instead of his customary 100-yard game he finished with only 14 yards in 13 carries. One key was the run support by Carlton Williamson, the 49ers' strong safety. That deprived Tim McKyer and Don Griffin, the 49ers' rookie cornerbacks, of support, but the 49ers led at the half, 17-0, and the game seemed over. ''There was no sense of panic,'' said Phil Simms, the Giants' quarterback. ''We didn't make any adjustments. I remember saying, 'Let's make some plays,' and we did.'' The Giants hit one big play after another, including passes against the cornerbacks. The Giants scored three touchdowns in the third quarter and won a game that seemed lost. They won because, said Morris, the 49ers were still worried about his running when the Giants already had decided to pass, not run. The St. Louis Cardinals tried to stop Morris by putting their strong safety, Leonard Smith, close to the line of scrimmage, and Maurice Carthon, the Giants' fullback, spent most of the game knocking Smith out of plays. If the 49ers use Williamson to stop the run, they risk similar treatment and also risk single coverage on Simms's receivers. The Giants' defense, the backbone of the team all season, must contend with Montana's cleverness and mobility. He generally passes from short drops to avoid the rush. He has escaped Lawrence Taylor in the past because a specially designed offensive scheme has John Ayers, a big but quick guard, block the Giants' feared linebacker. But Ayers will probably miss all or most of this game because of a sprained left ankle, and his replacement, Guy McIntyre, is not as adept in pass blocking. PRO FOOTBALL
