812|1987\01\04|IN TRENTON, COMING ELECTIONS COMPLICATE FAMILIAR PROBLEMS|The New Jersey Legislature will continue to wrestle this year with many of the same problems it faced in 1986 - insurance costs, shore and wetlands protection, transportation financing and municipal aid. But there will be an added complication: all 120 seats in the Senate and the Assembly will be up for election in|The New Jersey Legislature will continue to wrestle this year with many of the same problems it faced in 1986 - insurance costs, shore and wetlands protection, transportation financing and municipal aid. But there will be an added complication: all 120 seats in the Senate and the Assembly will be up for election in The New Jersey Legislature will continue to wrestle this year with many of the same problems it faced in 1986 - insurance costs, shore and wetlands protection, transportation financing and municipal aid. But there will be an added complication: all 120 seats in the Senate and the Assembly will be up for election in November. Last year was the first time in a dozen years that the two houses were controlled by different parties. The Democrats control the Senate but the Assembly has a Republican majority, a result of Governor Kean's landslide re-election victory in 1985, when only the lower house was on the ballot. From 1973 through 1985, the Democrats controlled both houses. With the divided Legislature, the Senate and Assembly in 1986 failed to agree on most major bills. The two houses did compromise on bills to amend the state's Civil Service system and to give state colleges greater autonomy. Warnings From House Leaders The legislative leaders - Senate President John F. Russo, Democrat of Toms River, and Assembly Speaker Charles L. Hardwick, Republican of Westfield - said in separate interviews that they believed greater cooperation was possible in 1987. But each warned that he was prepared to hold the other house accountable in the upcoming campaign if major issues were not resolved. The first bill passed by the Assembly in 1986 could become one of the first battles of 1987. The measure would change current automobile insurance law to allow suits for pain and suffering only in cases of permanent injury, disfigurement or death. The change, which Governor Kean supports, is intended to lower insurance costs due to pain-and-suffering suits and to reduce premiums paid by motorists. The Senate has rejected the measure and sent its own insurance bill to the Assembly. Mr. Hardwick predicted the Assembly would amend the Senate bill to match its version and send it back to the Senate, with additional information from the State Insurance Department about the potential cost savings the change could bring. If the Senate refuses to accept the change, it will become part of the coming campaign, he said. 'They Will Lose' ''We will take the issue to the marketplace of political ideas, and they will lose,'' he said of the Democrats. Another issue that has divided the two houses is how to reduce liability insurance costs. The Republicans and Mr. Kean favor placing limits on court awards that Mr. Russo says will not pass the Senate. In the last year, the Assembly passed three other Kean administration initiatives and sent them to the Senate. A bill to let voters directly change state law or the Constitution through the ballot was kept in committee while the Senate passed its own version, effectively killing it for the time being. Another bill, to create the office of lieutenant governor, was voted down, and a third, to deny bail to defendants who are considered dangerous, is being studied by the Senate Judiciary Committee. Shore Aid to Be Discussed The Governor and the legislative leaders are reportedly ready to meet this month to seek a compromise on financing shore-erosion protection. The Assembly has passed a bill increasing the realty transfer tax to pay for it while the Senate favors a tax on motel and hotel rooms. Mr. Kean, Mr. Russo and Mr. Hardwick met late last month with a number of mayors to discuss the loss by counties and municipalities of $127 million in Federal revenue-sharing funds. They agreed that something must be done but not on where the money would come from.
