813|1987\01\04|COMMERCIAL TIMBER LEASING THREATENS OLD FOREST IN OREGON|Residents of Oregon's Willamette Valley are calling it ''the second battle of Bunker Hill,'' but it is really more like Custer's last stand.|Residents of Oregon's Willamette Valley are calling it ''the second battle of Bunker Hill,'' but it is really more like Custer's last stand. Residents of Oregon's Willamette Valley are calling it ''the second battle of Bunker Hill,'' but it is really more like Custer's last stand. At stake is a section of virgin forest, including trees 200 years or older, on and around Bunker Hill near Marcola, Ore. It is one of the last sections of such venerable forest remaining in a region where the great trees once stood in unbroken ranks for hundreds of miles. Many residents of Marcola and other communities in Lane County want to turn the 110-acre forest into a park to preserve its beauty, wildlife, recreational uses and historical and cultural significance. But the Interior Department's Bureau of Land Management is selling most of the forest to commercial timber companies. Venerable Trees and Wildlife The small forest is dominated by Douglas firs and hemlocks, some more than 600 years old and rising 200 feet from the forest floor. It also contains maples, dogwood and many other hardwood trees and a rich variety of wildlife, including rare pileated woodpeckers, local residents say. The Lane County Board of Commissioners has applied to the Bureau of Land Management to make the forest a protected park. The county made the application under the Federal Recreation and Public Purposes Act, which permits Federal land agencies to let communities use public land for public purposes. But the local office of the Bureau of the Land Management turned the application down. So did the bureau's regional office. The community is currently appealing the decision with the Interior Department's Board of Land Appeals. But that process may take two years or more, and logging is scheduled to begin Monday on 41 acres of the forest. Meanwhile, conservation groups are joining the effort to save the Bunker Hill forest. They say the issue has an importance that extends beyond the stand of trees. They say that at the rate the land bureau and the Agriculture Department's Forest Service are leasing forests for logging, most of the country's ancient forests will be gone in a few years. Threat to Older Forests ''This is a symbol of what the Federal Government is doing to what is left of our old growth forest,'' said the vice president of the National Audubon Society, Brock Evans. ''Trees like this exist nowhere else in the world but they keeping selling it for logging even though 90 percent of the old growth forest is gone.'' Under the public purposes law, the bureau has given local communities the right to use Federal lands for many purposes, including for dumping garbage. But the bureau's manager for the area that includes the forest, Lee Lauritzen, said that though the law permitted local communities to use Federal land for such things as garbage dumps, the land could not be used as a park unless it was a park of ''national interest.'' He said the bureau had determined that the Bunker Hill park would be only of ''local interest.'' Mr. Lauritzen said that the acreage that is to be logged starting Monday was leased before there was any talk of creating a park. He also said that the logging would create jobs and provide some revenue to Federal and local governments. Hal Hushbeck of Marcola, one of the organizers of the Bunker Hill Old Growth Task Force, a group that is trying to save the forest, said the Rosboro Lumber Company, which leased the section about to be cut, bought the timber when the market was high and would take a substantial loss because of current depressed market conditions. He said the company would be glad to sell back its lease but the land bureau would not agree to the sale. A person who answered the telephone at Roseboro said no one was available for comment. Repurchase of Lease Prohibited The chief of forestry in the land bureau's office in Washington, Henry Noldan, said the company could not legally sell the lease back to the Federal Government, nor could the bureau accept it. The policy prevents the bureau from having to buy back leases that buyers would want to return when market conditions became unfavorable. In any case, he said, ''many of us feel there is already enough old growth forest set aside'' for protection. He said 20 percent of commercial forest land had been set aside for other purposes, including protection of old growth. But Mr. Evans of the Audubon Society said the land bureau's plans called for protection of only 2 percent of the forests. ''In 10 to 15 years, there will be no old growth left except for isolated patches,'' he said. He said that until recent years, old-growth forest had been regarded as a kind of ''biological desert'' that supported little wildlife. But new information has shown that it is an indespensible habitat for a wide range of animal and plant life, he said. Another member of the Bunker Hill Task Force, Diane Albino, said she only went into the forest a few times a year for picnics or hikes. ''But I see it every day driving by and it is just beautiful,'' she said. ''It is a another world in there, a miniature rain forest that is quiet and away from everything. I think the B.L.M. attitude is appalling. They do their planning and listen to what the citizens say about values and livability and then do what they want to do anyway.''
