815|1987\01\04|COLD DAYS ARE BACK IN RUMANIA|With winter hard upon them, Rumanians are once again experiencing the drastic energy shortage that has made them shiver in barely heated and dimly lighted homes and workplaces through the last two winters, even more so than in the winters before.|With winter hard upon them, Rumanians are once again experiencing the drastic energy shortage that has made them shiver in barely heated and dimly lighted homes and workplaces through the last two winters, even more so than in the winters before. With winter hard upon them, Rumanians are once again experiencing the drastic energy shortage that has made them shiver in barely heated and dimly lighted homes and workplaces through the last two winters, even more so than in the winters before. Shortages of all foods, in a country that is a traditional food exporter, result in a dominant impression of a nation perennially standing in line with empty shopping bags and returning home with the bags scarcely fuller. Meanwhile, the tributes paid to the leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, and his wife, Elena, the country's second most powerful person, still require of Rumanians gestures of enthusiastic approval that contrast to the hardships of more than 21 years of Mr. Ceausescu's rule. In the eyes of Rumanians who take the risk of taking visitors or foreign diplomats into their confidence, the daily hardships and stern constraints on liberties dim the achievement for which Mr. Ceausescu is best known abroad - a foreign policy somewhat independent of the Soviet Union's. Cutting the Military A special plebiscite in November typified both aspects of Mr. Ceausescu's absolute rule. As the Soviet Union raised its military spending by 6 percent, he announced that he was cutting Rumania's armed forces, their equipment and budget by 5 percent. Then he ordered a plebiscite to approve his decision. Rumanians reported to their jobs on a Sunday, the only day off from their 46-hour work week, and voted yes unanimously, according to the Government's report. Children from age 14 voted in school, as Mr. Ceausescu lowered the voting age for the occasion. Because they were already at their machines or desks, most were told to put in a regular workday. Of a nation of more than 22 million, with 17.7 million eligible voters, all but 228 people voted and all votes were in favor, the Government said. In the propaganda campaign before the voting, Mr. Ceausescu's image was even more in evidence than usual. His words were inscribed on many walls, and his name dominated the two hours of television a day that are allowed during the power shortage. Plans Fulfilled, Goods Short Rumanian newspapers do not report on the shortages. A foreign reporter was told at the Ministries of Petroleum Extraction and Food Industry that the ministries had no explanation for the shortages. Both ministries are said to have fulfilled or surpassed their production plans, which provide for the needs of all Rumanians. A director at the Food Ministry, Ion Ruianu, denied that there were shortages. He said there might be occasional, brief shortcomings in distribution. Asked about the food lines, which begin before dawn and continue into dark in Bucharest and several provincial cities, Mr. Ruianu replied, ''We consider that this is only an appearance, because the statistical data show that the consumption of agricultural and food products increased every year in accordance with the needs of the populations.'' He said surplus products were exported only after all domestic needs were met. But a senior Government economist, who spoke anonymously, said that life would continue to be difficult for at least five years and that export production would remain the top priority during that period. Unlike other Communist leaders, Mr. Ceausescu has made repayment of the foreign debt, a result of costly and unproductive industrial investment in his early years in power, an overriding goal. Since 1982, he has approximately halved a debt estimated at its peak at $14 billion. The cost of this success has been disregard of basic consumer needs. Meat and dairy products have virtually disappeared from family tables. Asked about the fact that the same people are often seen in line mornings and evenings, Mr. Ruianu said they were hoarding. This brought bitter laughs from consumers. A woman said her family bought at best a couple of pounds of bones, the most frequently available product in the butcher shops. If the family is lucky, she said, the bones were of the better of two categories, with scraps of meat on them. ''The other kind is shiny,'' she said. The average wage is less than 3,000 lei a month. At the official rate, this is $300. The realistic rate is about one-sixth of that, the rate offered by the black-market currency dealers. A Pound of Meat a Month In Cluj, the main city of Transylvania, consumers reported a monthly meat ration of one pound. Gavril Groza, president of the county executive, sidestepped all questions on the availability of food. Consumers reported that bread, sugar, cooking oil and flour were rationed, but that the small amounts of the rations were not always available. Cheese and butter had become almost unknown, a woman reported. Such former staples as Rumanian ham, canned meats and cheese are seen only in hard-currency shops for foreigners. A saleswoman said flour, sugar and oil were also occasionally available for foreign currency, which Rumanians are forbidden to have. A result is that throughout the cities, foreign students, mainly Arabs and Africans, buy most of the Rumanian products that Rumanians may not buy with the money they earn, then resell them to Rumanians at great profit. A working woman with a 9-year-old child said she could feed her family only with the help of her elderly mother, who stands in lines while her daughter is at work. Campaign for More Children Despite the food shortages, Rumania is stepping up its longstanding campaign to encourage women to have more children. For years, contraceptives and abortions have been unavailable and illegal. As a result, illegal abortions have caused many deaths. The Government has stepped up obligatory monthly medical checks of women at their workplaces to detect pregnancies and keep them from being interrupted. Diplomats have received reports of implicit encouragement to schoolgirls to produce children out of wedlock. Although minimal electricity is expended to heat houses and workplaces, no energy is being spared on an ever more grandiose project to devastate the center of the capital and construct a vast avenue with Government palaces and apartment buildings to mark what is officially called ''the Ceausescu Epoch, the Age of Gold.'' The only public grumbling heard by a visitor in 15 days came from an old woman bemoaning the vanishing of the old town, with its traditional houses, churches and synagogues. It has earned for Mr. Ceausescu the honorific of ''Hero of Agriculture,'' as one joke has it, ''for plowing up the entire center of Bucharest.''
