816|1987\01\04|ISRAELI NAVY STOPS 2 LEBANON FERRIES, CYPRUS SAYS|An Israeli gunboat stopped a Cypriot ferry bound for Lebanon today despite a protest from Cyprus after a similar incident was reported on Friday, port officials said.|An Israeli gunboat stopped a Cypriot ferry bound for Lebanon today despite a protest from Cyprus after a similar incident was reported on Friday, port officials said. An Israeli gunboat stopped a Cypriot ferry bound for Lebanon today despite a protest from Cyprus after a similar incident was reported on Friday, port officials said. The officials in the Lebanese port of Junieh said the ferry, the Empress, was stopped off the Lebanese coast. The Israeli gunboat allowed it to proceed after being told that only crewmen were aboard, they said. Earlier, Cyprus asserted that on Friday night, Israel stopped another Junieh-bound ferry, the Sunny Boat, and turned it back to Larnaca after the Cypriot captain refused an Israeli demand that he hand over Palestinian passengers. 'Unacceptable' Action ''It is entirely unacceptable, and we have already made a strong protest to the Israeli authorities,'' said a Cypriot spokesman, Petros Voskarides. ''The allegation that the ship, which was intercepted in international waters, was carrying Palestinian fighters is arbitrary, to say the least.'' In Israel, a military spokesman confirmed that the Sunny Boat had been intercepted but said it was allowed to continue its journey.  [ Foreign Minister Shimon Peres denied that Israel was blockading Junieh, The Associated Press reported from Tel Aviv. But Mr. Peres added, ''Every time we have information about the movement of guerrillas or weapons which could pose a threat, we take preventive measures.'' ]  The Israeli state radio said the captain of the gunboat first asked the Sunny Boat's captain to hand over Palestinian passengers and, when he refused, ordered the ship back to Cyprus. The captain of the Sunny Boat, Dimitris Vrakas, said the captain of the Israeli gunboat had told him by radio, ''You and the other ship do not follow our instructions and you continue to bring Palestinian terrorists back to Lebanon.'' Israel has stated on several occasions in the past that its navy will take whatever action it sees fit to prevent guerrilla attacks and insure the country's security. In Beirut today, President Amin Gemayel asked the United States Ambassador, John Kelly, for Washington's support to insure that Israel stopped interfering with the ferry service, official sources said. A Daily Shuttle The Sunny Boat and the Empress run a daily 14-hour shuttle between Larnaca and Junieh, in Christian-held territory north of Beirut. The route is vital for Lebanese Christians and Westerners fearful of passing through Moslem-controlled West Beirut to reach the international airport just south of the city.
