819|1987\01\04|HOLIDAY FESTIVAL TO BE CELEBRATED|The feast of the Epiphany, marking the visit of the three kings to the birthplace of Jesus in Bethlehem, will be observed today at services in churches throughout the metropolitan area. It will be observed with special pageantry among Spanish-speaking people who hold the feast as one of the most important religious holidays.|The feast of the Epiphany, marking the visit of the three kings to the birthplace of Jesus in Bethlehem, will be observed today at services in churches throughout the metropolitan area. It will be observed with special pageantry among Spanish-speaking people who hold the feast as one of the most important religious holidays. The feast of the Epiphany, marking the visit of the three kings to the birthplace of Jesus in Bethlehem, will be observed today at services in churches throughout the metropolitan area. It will be observed with special pageantry among Spanish-speaking people who hold the feast as one of the most important religious holidays. In Spanish-speaking communities, the holiday is called the Fiesta de los Tres Reyes, the Feast of the Three Kings. It will be marked in many churches with children dressed as the three kings offering gifts to the Christ child and with festive community lunches and gift-giving to children. A curator of Museo del Barrio in Manhattan, Rafael Morales, said that in Spanish-speaking countries gifts are given at the feast and not at Christmas. On Tuesday, beginning at 10 A.M., the museum at 1230 Fifth Avenue near 104th Street will sponsor its annual children's costume procession, complete with camels and other animals, through the streets of Spanish Harlem. Visit Re-enacted ''January 6 is the official feast day in Spain and Latin America,'' said the pastor of Our Lady of Guadalupe at 229 West 14th Street in Manhattan, the Rev. Francisco Dominguez. ''But here in the United States it is observed on the closest Sunday to the feast so that more people can go to church.'' Yesterday at the church, 15 children, dressed in costumes re-enacted the visit of the three kings in a play. Today, during the 11 A.M. mass, children will bring their offerings to children dressed as Jesus, Mary and Joseph. In the Bronx, at Immaculate Conception Church, which has mostly Italian and Hispanic parishioners, the Spanish Society will hold a community party and luncheon after the 10:30 A.M. mass at which children will receive gifts. The church is at 754 East Gun Hill Road. The most spectacular observance will be the two-hour procession, now in its 10th year, at Museo del Barrio. Seven hundred to 1,000 costumed children are expected to participate.
