823|1987\01\04|AFTERNOON OF UPS AND DOWNS FOR CARTER|It was the longest fourth quarter for Russell Carter, the Jets' third-year cornerback and one-time psychology major out of Southern Methodist. The vicissitudes of his involvement were so great that, were he a subject on a couch, he would be diagnosed as having a dual personality, if not triple and quadruple.|It was the longest fourth quarter for Russell Carter, the Jets' third-year cornerback and one-time psychology major out of Southern Methodist. The vicissitudes of his involvement were so great that, were he a subject on a couch, he would be diagnosed as having a dual personality, if not triple and quadruple. It was the longest fourth quarter for Russell Carter, the Jets' third-year cornerback and one-time psychology major out of Southern Methodist. The vicissitudes of his involvement were so great that, were he a subject on a couch, he would be diagnosed as having a dual personality, if not triple and quadruple. He is nine credits short of a degree, and, he said, one lesson that has stayed with him from his school days in the head courses is ''never get down on yourself.'' He might have had reason to today, when he seemed to have aided and abetted the opposition mightily. The Jets, on this cold afternoon with a wintry breeze wafting in from Lake Erie beside Cleveland Stadium, were ahead by 13-10 early in the fourth quarter, but the Browns, behind Bernie Kosar, were moving downfield with purpose. On third down and 6 yards to go on the Jets' 14, Kosar threw a sideline pass to Webster Slaughter who, just as he was about to catch the ball, received a push from Carter, according to the referee. ''I just thought it was a bad call,'' Carter would later say. Never mind. It was first down for the Browns, and only 10 yards from the goal line. After two running plays by Kevin Mack brought the Browns to the 2, Kosar tried another pass to win the game. Interception Ends Threat He threw it to Slaughter, again, or thought he did. In fact, he threw it to Carter, who intercepted the ball in the end zone. There was no return. Nine minutes remained and the Jets would score again to make it 20-10 in their favor. They were, well, if not home free, then certainly on the right road. Kosar had been intercepted only 10 times in more than 500 passing attempts all season, the lowest interception ratio of any quarterback in the National Football League, and this was the first time after 133 passes in which he had not been picked off. ''Kosar gets rid of the ball fast,'' said Carter, ''and the defensive line doesn't give pressure enough to get to him.'' But, Carter said, ''You can only hold a great team so long.'' And then the Browns were coming back. They scored one touchdown, and it was 20-17, and then they were threatening to score again. With no timeouts left and 51 seconds to go, Kosar threw to Slaughter, who made a leaping catch at the Jets' 5. The defender was Carter. 'A Great Catch' ''It was a great catch,'' he said. ''I was all over him. I couldn't have been closer to him.'' On the next play, Kosar again went to Slaughter in the end zone. The closest defender to Slaughter was that old psych major from S.M.U. The game, and the ball, hung in the balance. ''I didn't see the ball, I was just following the receiver,'' said Carter. And suddenly he felt the ball hit his hand. ''I sideswiped the ball. I didn't have time to get two hands on the ball.'' It was enough to prevent the touchdown. But Carter, in the heat of the moment, fell to his knees and hung his head in frustration at not having made an interception that surely would have concluded the game. ''It was close,'' he said later. It gave the Browns one more chance, and Mark Moseley kicked a 22-yard field goal to tie the game. One overtime and some change later, Moseley kicked another to finish off the Jets. Afterward, Carter walked off the field and was met by some old friends of his on the Browns, Rickey Bolden, Gerald McNeil and Felix Wright. ''Rickey and I were teammates at S.M.U., and we both live in Dallas,'' said Carter. ''He's getting married in the offseason and asked if I was going to be in Dallas. I said I was.'' Was anything other than home discussed - like the game? ''Well, we just said, 'Nice game, nice game,' '' said Carter. ''We knew who won and lost. What else was there to say?''
