825|1987\01\04|HOPES MINGLE WITH DESPAIR AT LAST STOP|Christopher Dellisanty's frustrating search for his brother finally brought him and his mother, Rose, to the place they did not want to go: a government hospital where forensic experts are trying to identify charred bodies from the fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel.|Christopher Dellisanty's frustrating search for his brother finally brought him and his mother, Rose, to the place they did not want to go: a government hospital where forensic experts are trying to identify charred bodies from the fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel. Christopher Dellisanty's frustrating search for his brother finally brought him and his mother, Rose, to the place they did not want to go: a government hospital where forensic experts are trying to identify charred bodies from the fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel. There, at the Rio Piedras Medical Center, Mr. Dellisanty and his mother joined members of 80 other families waiting in a cordoned-off area of the hospital for news of relatives who have been missing since Wednesday, when the fire occurred. ''We've been putting off coming here,'' Mr. Dellisanty, who is seeking word of his brother, Angelo, a construction worker, 49 years old. ''It would be a miracle if he were alive.'' The Dellisantys are from Newark. The Experts at Work At the hospital, a team of more than 40 pathologists, including eight members of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from Washington, have been trying to identify 95 bodies, using dental records, descriptions of jewelry and other information. Since the disaster, 21 victims have been identified at the center, said Dr. Luis Izquierdo Mora, the Secretary of Health of Puerto Rico. ''Most are not recognizable,'' Dr. Izquierdo Mora said. ''That's what takes time. It's impossible to say how long all this will take.'' Mr. Dellisanty and his mother flew to San Juan on New Year's Day and have been waiting for news since then. Clutching a local newspaper, Mr. Dellisanty pointed to a name on a list of victims, Frank Dellisanty. It was his father's name, but his father had died last month in New Jersey. ''This is too much of a coincidence,'' Mr. Dellisanty said. ''We figure he was carrying some pay stubs of my father and they misidentified him.' Many Records Out of Reach Nearby, a Red Cross worker handed forms to waiting relatives and asked for descriptions of anything the relatives could think of that would help. Many of the families could not get essential records because it was a weekend and they could not reach their dentists and doctors. Several Roman Catholic priests and Protestant ministers circulated among the families attempting to console them, offering prayers. Or they just listened to the venting of feelings, which ranged from anger and denial to acceptance. ''One family wants to know if they can take the body directly to the funeral home once it is identified,'' a medical worker asked Dr. Efren Ramirez, a supervising doctor. Victims' Names Grow on Chart After checking his list for the name of the missing person, Dr. Ramirez said: ''Yes, but unfortunately the name is not on the list of the people we have identified. I'm sorry they have to wait a while longer.'' The medical team lifted fingerprints from the covered bodies while other doctors and forensic experts examined dental records. Names of victims were added to a chart on the wall as victims were identified. After the body of a woman from Queens was identified, the family was called into another room, where a psychiatrist, a nurse and a priest were on hand. The doctor talked in a hushed tone. The family members hugged each other and wept. Meanwhile, Sara Rodriguez of Westport, Conn., waited for news of her cousin, a lawyer and businesswoman in San Juan. The body was identified at the hotel after the fire, and preparations were being made for a funeral, but the family did not know where the body was until today. ''I am more calm now that we found out where she was taken,'' Mrs. Rodriguez said. ''She was a teacher, lawyer, and friend, very humble and very loyal.'' At the burn center at Rio Piedras, a Catholic priest, Florentino Saenz, said that a team of Catholic priests and Protestant pastors have been available since the disaster to relatives of the victims. ''We are here to provide a basic human support for a tragic accident,'' he said. ---- The Waiting at Home In the New York metropolitan area, families anxiously awaited word yesterday. EaA woman who identified herself as the sister of William Craine, a 21-year-old Queens resident reported missing in San Juan, answered the phone at the Craine home in Howard Beach. She broke down and wept when she was asked if she had any news on the whereabouts of her brother or her grandmother, who was traveling with him. ''My father went there yesterday to see what he can find out,'' said the woman. ''but we didn't get any more information.'' Referring to her brother, she said, ''Him and my grandmother are still missing.'' To the Island on a Cruise She said they had gone to Puerto Rico on ''a cruise with an aunt and uncle and five or six cousins,'' adding that most of her relatives were on the beach when the fire broke out. A compilation of victims of the fire released later in the day by The Associated Press listed a William Crane, 31, of Howard Beach, among the dead. #33 on an Excursion In Connecticut, friends and relatives of seven people missing in Puerto Rico turned their attention to gathering dental records yesterday. The missing Connecticut residents were from a group of 33 on a New Year's excursion to the Caribbean. It was the sixth such trip they had made in six years. ''Seven of our friends are missing -it's a death watch,'' said John Benevento, of Woodbridge, who escaped the fire by smashing a chair through a window and jumping to a patio. Among those unaccounted for, according to friends, relatives, and news reports, were Robert Melillo of Cheshire, Susan Lawrence of Shelton, Linda Borkowski of Beacon Falls, Jerry Mendell of Easton, Joseph Gully of Stratford, Alvin Cohen, 56, of Hamden, and Joel V. Katz, 50, of Trumbull.
