827|1987\01\04|Billionaires|To the Editor:  The six letters published Nov. 9 in response to David Kotz's article, ''How Many Billionaires Are Enough?'' were all critical of the idea that there could be too much wealth. While a wealthy person's tendency to justify economic inequality is understandable, such justifications do nothing to remedy the moral unacceptability of the vast and growing improverishment of certain citizens.|To the Editor:  The six letters published Nov. 9 in response to David Kotz's article, ''How Many Billionaires Are Enough?'' were all critical of the idea that there could be too much wealth. While a wealthy person's tendency to justify economic inequality is understandable, such justifications do nothing to remedy the moral unacceptability of the vast and growing improverishment of certain citizens. To the Editor:  The six letters published Nov. 9 in response to David Kotz's article, ''How Many Billionaires Are Enough?'' were all critical of the idea that there could be too much wealth. While a wealthy person's tendency to justify economic inequality is understandable, such justifications do nothing to remedy the moral unacceptability of the vast and growing improverishment of certain citizens. Women and children in particular are suffering poverty in increasing numbers, as is well known. Do the letter writers care that the wealthy drive $50,000 cars while mothers worry whether the can of beans will last another day? Do the letter writers care that the wealthy spend hundreds on hairdoes while children's teeth rot because of lack of attention. Extensive poverty in the midst of wealth cannot be tolerated. The Reaganesque justifications of gross inequality have just about played themselves out. I agree with the letter writers that hard work and productivity are virtues to be respected and protected. But I must add that justice and human dignity deserve equal consideration, which they have not had these past several years.  JIM MOORE  Santa Rosa, Calif., Nov. 10
