83|1987\01\01|MUSIC: LEINSDORF LEADS PHILHARMONIC PROGRAM|The excitement of music for Erich Leinsdorf, who led the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night, seems to lie more in the understanding, analysis, appreciation of it - as expressed through playing - than in the physical or psychological thrill of performing itself. His appreciation (as one knows it from his lucid books) is not dusty or stern, but many listeners, this one included, find his actual performing style disappointingly cut and dried.|The excitement of music for Erich Leinsdorf, who led the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night, seems to lie more in the understanding, analysis, appreciation of it - as expressed through playing - than in the physical or psychological thrill of performing itself. His appreciation (as one knows it from his lucid books) is not dusty or stern, but many listeners, this one included, find his actual performing style disappointingly cut and dried. The excitement of music for Erich Leinsdorf, who led the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night, seems to lie more in the understanding, analysis, appreciation of it - as expressed through playing - than in the physical or psychological thrill of performing itself. His appreciation (as one knows it from his lucid books) is not dusty or stern, but many listeners, this one included, find his actual performing style disappointingly cut and dried. One still listens with pleasure, because it is always a pleasure to hear good music confidently handled by someone who understands it and because orchestras tend to play well for Mr. Leinsdorf. Still, Mozart's ''Jupiter'' Symphony did not produce that new experience of wonder that can come with a well-known piece freshly imagined, and the lilt of the shepherds' music from Bach's ''Christmas Oratorio'' was not so evocative of the biblical scene as it has sometimes seemed. The soloist was Yefim Bronfman, who sat down after intermission to play a pair of substantial ''Fantasies'' for piano and orchestra. One was by the young Debussy, who suppressed its publication with some justification. It contains clear pointers toward the kind of music the composer wanted to write, but he had not yet achieved the economy that would purge his later scores of filler music; here, there is too often a sense of sugary, wandering reiteration of ideas. It's pretty, and (except for some passages near the end when overloud horn playing left the strings and Mr. Bronfman sounding puny) it was well performed. The other work was Liszt's ''Hungarian Fantasy,'' in which Mr. Bronfman had a rousing success. At best, as in the unaccompanied beginning of the fast section and a few of the interspersed cadenzas, he treated the music to an elegant, sparkling play of light and shade. He used dynamics liberally to help in shaping phrases, a procedure apparently obvious but one that many pianists neglect to adopt (especially in concerto work). His soft, fast passage work is not the last word in clarity, but it was a pleasure to hear a Liszt player who realized that this is just as important as hard, fast octaves. Mr. Bronfman provided those, too - again, not so stunningly as to give the thrill of virtuosity but more than well enough to serve a fine musical conception of a piece that can be made to sound trashy. Here it sounded utterly enjoyable, and the audience made its agreement with that sentiment clear. Then came some of the Viennese desserts traditionally favored by the Philharmonic for the New Year's week: ''Bahn frei'' (''Free passage'') by Eduard Strauss and two favorites by brother Johann, with conductor and audience in suitably cheerful spirits.
