830|1987\01\04|IF IT AIN'T BROKE...|MARCH of 1997. Liberty Baptist College is about to play Boston College in the Honda/Mitsubishi/ Suntory Sayonara Bowl in Tokyo. The winner will receive $10 million and the loser $5 million, just like a heavyweight fight. Don King is the promoter, of course.|MARCH of 1997. Liberty Baptist College is about to play Boston College in the Honda/Mitsubishi/ Suntory Sayonara Bowl in Tokyo. The winner will receive $10 million and the loser $5 million, just like a heavyweight fight. Don King is the promoter, of course. MARCH of 1997. Liberty Baptist College is about to play Boston College in the Honda/Mitsubishi/ Suntory Sayonara Bowl in Tokyo. The winner will receive $10 million and the loser $5 million, just like a heavyweight fight. Don King is the promoter, of course. Liberty Baptist and Boston College are the only undefeated teams in the land because Michigan has lost in the Rose Bowl for the 83d straight year and Southern Methodist, in its first year back from a long suspension, has lost in the Cotton Bowl. At halftime of the Sayonara Bowl, the amiable color man, Brian Bosworth, interviews the new President of the United States. Wearing his legendary ''rose-colored'' dark glasses, President Joe Paterno pronounces: ''Let me make it perfectly clear. The winner of this game will be national champion.'' What's so bad with this picture? What's wrong with the annual survival-of-the-fittest, money-talks, freebooting system of bowl games determining an unofficial champion? Joe Paterno would like to change the bowl system, and when Paterno talks, it is worth listening. He has just won his second championship with Penn State's 14-10 victory over Miami in the Fiesta Bowl Friday night. This game was obviously for the national title because the Fiesta Bowl hustlers - looking like a platoon of award-winning real estate agents in their citrus jackets - were able to cut a deal with NBC and Penn State and Miami and put a game on prime time on Jan. 2, after all the other bowls had gone to sleep. The game must have been a huge success for the television people, because a series of winter storms kept people huddled in front of the tube near midnight in the East, as the Heisman Trophy winner, Vinny Testaverde, moved his team down the field before being intercepted. Reasonably fresh from a few hours' sleep, Paterno came to the morning-after conference yesterday and put in his annual plug for a national playoff system. ''I can't believe that after 75 million or 85 million or whatever, that this wasn't a great showcase for college football,'' Paterno said. ''Kids trying to win it. That's what it's all about.'' Paterno praised the idea of the top-rated and second-rated teams playing for the title, saying, ''When you're a competitor, you want to beat the other team. Poise and determination in the clutch.'' Pardon the coach if he sounds like a crusader. He thinks his teams of 1968, 1969 and 1973 were jobbed out of consideration for the national title because there was no way to prove themselves. In the 1969 season, his team beat Missouri in the Orange Bowl, 10-3, to finish with an 11-0 record but was outpointed by undefeated Texas in the balloting by coaches and football writers. Paterno has always blamed one fan, a certain Richard M. Nixon, then employed as a public servant in Washington. Mr. Nixon had attended the Texas-Arkansas game during the regular season and had declared on national television that the winner of that game would be champ for the year. ''I don't understand how Richard Nixon could know so much about college football in 1969 and so little about Watergate in 1973,'' Paterno told the Penn State graduates in June 1973. Now Paterno has won two unofficial titles, getting his second chance because Penn State and Miami both play a nonconference schedule and were available for the Fiesta Bowl's blatant tropism toward prime time. The promoters here are talking up designating a different major bowl each year to decide the national title, of having an impartial panel (including, one assumes, Mr. Nixon, who is more than available for such tasks) choose the two candidates. Paterno, deservedly the Mr. Clean of college coaches, went even further yesterday. He said he didn't want to interfere with the bowls, and would prefer ''four teams coming out of the bowls, playing semifinals and finals, spreading it around, a couple more weeks of college football, it's exciting.'' No coach is more entitled to this grandiose vision than Paterno, a voice of conscience and humor and rationality for his 21 seasons. But as the wise old men used to say, whittling on the front steps of the general store back home in the picturesque hollows of central Queens, ''If it ain't broke, don't fix it.'' What's wrong with a system that mixes anarchy with conference loyalties, cold hard cash with the magic wand of Presidential intercession, the ingenuity of network magnates bumping up against the polls of coaches and football writers? I know I've said this before, but I like the suspense every fall of seeing who will ante up the most bucks to lure scholar-athletes to some warm spot on the map. I like descending hordes of bowl officials, with their exotic accents, calling everybody ''Hoss'' and ''Buddy'' and ''Son,'' wearing those bright coats like a technicolor television test pattern. This is America. Lee Iacocca told me so. Freedom of choice: You believe what you want, I believe what I want, you buy a Volkswagen, I buy a Nissan, better dead than Red. I'm not sure that the prospect of a sterile, official, pasteurized, homogenized National Collegiate Athletic Association championship playoff isn't some plot straight from the Kremlin. I've been to Russia - one brand of toothpaste, one brand of coffee, one political party. Is this what we want in the land of opportunity? No, suh, buddy, I'm waiting till next fall to watch the Fiesta Bowl try to fend off some other new bowl on the block, its promoters wearing day-glo jackets and promising to play in prime time in Death Valley. The conferences may not survive this gold rush, but isn't it time we broke them up, the way they broke up the telephone company? I haven't been able to get a straight answer out of a telephone official since, but, hey, free enterprise, it's only patriotic. SPORTS OF THE TIMES
