832|1987\01\04|NORTHEAST JOURNAL|Devilish Collectors In Portland, Me.|Devilish Collectors In Portland, Me. Devilish Collectors In Portland, Me. FAUST sold his soul to Mephistopheles, and now bibliophiles in Portland, Me., who admit a fiendish passion for their libraries, have found the demon they pay homage to in a drawing by the artist Leonard Baskin. ''The Demon of the Book Collector,'' a pen-and-ink rendering of a snarling, ghoul jealously clutching an armful of books, appears on the 1987 calendar of the Carlson & Turner Antiquarian Book Shop on this city's east side. Confirmed collectors say they identify with the demon. Eliot Stanley, president of the 45-member Baxter Society, a statewide bibliophiles club, said, ''Any book collector has had bad dreams that could be realized in this drawing.'' But some customers who admit only a casual attachment to books are horrified by it. ''It's a frightening figure,'' said Clark Neily, head of the city's Department of Economic Development. ''But then I'm not a book collector.'' Indeed, said David Turner, co-owner of the shop with Norma Carlson, perhaps only those who ''know the demon'' can appreciate such possessive rage, finding in it a reflection of the ''lust for books'' that plagues serious collectors. No one knows the demon better, Mr. Turner said, than Bradford Hale. For 23 years the 68-year-old Mr. Hale has kept a library of 3,000 books on the military and naval history of Europe locked in a warehouse in Portland. The collection is too large for his single room in a downtown boarding house, and Mr. Hill said he has been on a waiting list for public housing for two-and-a-half years. He became angry at the suggestion he sell his library, valued at about $50,000, and buy himself a home. ''You've committed heresy,'' he cried. ''The point is not a comfortable place for me to live. The point is a place for me to live where my books would be comfortable.'' When asked to explain the obsession, Mr. Hale answered, ''Can you explain love?'' But Mr. Turner, busy sliding calendars into mailing envelopes, said, ''The demon.'' Memorial Signs On Delaware Road A highway sign installed last week alongside a county road in rural Sussex County, Delaware, states simply, ''D.U.I. killed 1 here.'' But to Bertram and Peggy Abrahart of Angola, the tombstone-shaped marker is a memorial to their 14-year-old daughter, Suzanne, who was killed near the spot by a driver under the influence of alcohol in 1976. Similar signs may soon be seen all over Delaware under a program sponsored by the State Office of Highway Safety and Mothers Against Drunk Drivers. ''We see it as an opportunity to combine a memorial and a message,'' said Marcene Gory of the state highway office. The reflective signs, designed and installed by the State Division of Highways, are being offered free of charge to relatives of victims of drunken drivers. Safety officials also hope the effort will resolve another traffic problem, caused by people placing their own memorials at accident scenes. An unauthorized sign erected to mark the site of a death near I-95 in Wilmington was knocked down in a matter of hours - by another drunken driver. Three crosses erected to mark the scene of three deaths near Dover Air Force Base have caused a major hazard as motorists either slow down or pull off the busy highway to investigate them, Ms. Gory said. Drunken drivers were blamed for more than 60 percent of the highway fatalities in Delaware in 1986. Sporting Problem For Boston Mayor BOSTON'S athletic teams have scored major victories this year, but one of the city's major sports fans is displeased with the way that some games are being played. Mayor Raymond L. Flynn is distressed by what he sees as ''senseless violence'' among athletes in games. He has written letters to the managements of the city's professional teams asking them to curb violence among players and threatening, as a last recourse, to have heedless players arrested for assault. The Mayor's first voiced his concern after a hockey game Nov. 19 in which brawls overshadowed the Montreal Canadiens' victory over the Boston Bruins. After that game, Mr. Flynn spoke to the parents of children who play hockey, who were upset with the example set by the professional athletes. ''When a mayor is talking about setting a tone for his or her city on issues like staying in school or encouraging young people to avoid drugs, he can't at the same time look the other way from the occurrence of wanton violence in the athletic arena,'' said Francis J. Costello, the Mayor's press secretary. ''We don't allow violence in a movie theater, public street or public building. A sports arena is no different.'' Samuel Gifford, vice president of the Delaware North Companies, the hockey team's parent organization, said that the Bruins management was puzzled by the Mayor's letter. ''You don't get things like this all the time,'' he said, ''We're going to seek guidance from the National Hockey League on this one.'' Many Boston fans were skeptical of the Mayor's campaign against sports violence, and say that it is unenforceable. One longtime Bruins fan said, ''I just can't see the Boston police risking breaking a leg on the ice to interrupt a hockey game.''
