833|1987\01\04|RACE TO BUILD MALL STIRS CONCERNS IN BERSHIRE|The pace of development in Berkshire County has been dramatically accelerated by a heated competition to build the first regional shopping mall in this predominantly rural county on the western edge of Massachusetts.|The pace of development in Berkshire County has been dramatically accelerated by a heated competition to build the first regional shopping mall in this predominantly rural county on the western edge of Massachusetts. The pace of development in Berkshire County has been dramatically accelerated by a heated competition to build the first regional shopping mall in this predominantly rural county on the western edge of Massachusetts. Last autumn three national developers unveiled rival plans for malls at different sites in central Berkshire County. The situation has become a race among the developers, since it is generally acknowledged that the local population of 150,000 people is enough to support only one regional mall. In mid-October the Pyramid Companies of Syracuse, N.Y., quietly obtained a local building permit for a 500,000-square-foot mall in the small town of Lanesboro. About the same time a partnership between Melvin Simon & Associates of Indianapolis and Simon Konover & Associates of West Hartford, Conn., announced plans to build a mall at a busy intersection in the larger city of Pittsfield. Meanwhile, the Shopco Group of New York City unveiled a proposal for another mall in the southern end of Pittsfield along Route 7. Confusion Among Residents This sudden burst of activity has provoked confusion and controversy in Berkshire County, which is struggling to balance preservation of its scenic beauty and casual pace with the need to broaden the county's economic base. Many residents and officials are in favor of a mall here, but the chaotic circumstances have also dismayed many people, including mall supporters. ''This happened so fast that everyone was immediately forced to be either for or against the mall on an emotional basis with no chance to really think about what it will mean for the community's future,'' said Mindy Guidi, a neighbor of the Lanesboro mall site, where Pyramid started preliminary construction just two weeks after officially announcing their project. Compounding the confusion is the parallel competition between officials in Pittsfield and Lanesboro, which would each prefer to see the mall situated within its own borders to broaden the local tax base. This has caused friction between the two governments and prompted official drives within each community to accelerate the approval process for the malls. Tourism Creates Affluence The development race comes at a time when Berkshire County's economy has become increasingly divided. The county's economic mainstays have steadily declined as local manufacturing plants have cut back operations or disappeared altogether. At the same time, Berkshire County's cultural activities, including the Tanglewood summer music program, its skiing and its scenery have given it an appeal to tourists and affluent seasonal vacationers that has mushroomed, spurring a boom in real estate, construction, retailing and other service industries. This is also changing the county's landscape, as new developments spread out over the countryside. This change has placed middle-class residents in a difficult predicament. Employment trends are shifting to lower-paying service jobs, while the cost of living is rising as real estate and other local markets become increasingly oriented to affluent outside buyers. This has spurred countywide efforts to encourage new growth here, like a mall. While that basic goal is widely shared, opinions on the most appropriate strategies vary widely. Call for Control Many people warn that unless the county makes an assertive and coordinated effort to control growth now, it will quickly succumb to the severe problems like congestion and pollution that often accompany runaway development. Critics are dismayed by the mall situation, which they see as an ominous indication of a lack of ability and willingness to make this effort. ''The communities involved in this race don't seem to want to step back and look at its implications,'' said George S. Wislocki, director of the Berkshire Natural Resources Council, an environmental advocacy organization. ''Instead, they're willing to give away the store to win the competition for the mall. That attitude is not going to be healthy for the county in the long run.'' But the mall competition is perceived more optimistically by others who see it as a reflection of vitality and progress. Proponents also defend the support of local officials toward the mall developers and contend that reasonable environmental considerations will not be disregarded. ''Right now, the county can't afford to take an adversarial role with these project,'' contends James W. Wallace, president and chief executive officer of the Central Berkshire Chamber of Commerce. ''It would send out a strong signal that the county is anti-growth. Instead we should be grateful that these developers are willing to make an investment of that magnitude here, and support them.'' Despite the rapid pace of events, it will probably be some time before the outcome of the race is determined. The fate of each mall proposal will depend on many different factors, including the decisions of the department stores that the developers are trying to lure as major tenants and the results of the state and local environmental review processes.
