834|1987\01\04|ON VERGE OF A CLEANUP, BOSTON TAKES CLOSE LOOK AT HARBOR, SLUDGE AND ALL|This metropolitan area of three million people is on the threshold of a protracted and costly effort to return its polluted harbor to a healthy state, something no one now living has ever seen.|This metropolitan area of three million people is on the threshold of a protracted and costly effort to return its polluted harbor to a healthy state, something no one now living has ever seen. This metropolitan area of three million people is on the threshold of a protracted and costly effort to return its polluted harbor to a healthy state, something no one now living has ever seen. To show the public what this means, the New England Aquarium is mounting an unusual exhibit of Boston Harbor's past, present and what many hope will be its cleaner future. At the center of the exhibit will be a tank diplaying the dismal state of the harbor, which is among the most polluted major harbors in the country. The condition of the harbor is so bad that a Federal court has ordered a cleanup effort that will stretch at least until the end of the century and cost about $2 billion. The exhibit, designed to educate the aquarium's one million visitors each year, will include ''obnoxious blue-green algal mats,'' according to Leslie S. Kaufman, a research scientist who is the aquarium's Curator of Education. The mats, which are bacterial and not a true algae, flourish in the harbor ''because it's the only thing that can prosper in that environment,'' he said. Sores and Diseased Livers There will probably also be some pseudopleuronectes americanus, known variously as winter flounder, blackback flounder and gray sole, a popular game fish that thrives on the organic matter found in sewage, although the larger, older specimens typically have cancerous sores on the body and fins and a diseased liver. The predilections of the flounder are easy to see, according to Dr. Kaufman. He has been out in the harbor at low tide in the summer to take water samples near a crack in an outflow pipe, where raw sewage from a wide crescent surrounding Boston forms a geyser. ''You can find it by looking for the fishing boats,'' he said. A second tank will show smelt, salmon, striped bass, river herring and other species believed to have been present in better times. Some species were driven off by pollution, some by loss of spawning grounds and some by both, he said. The aquarium already has a small display dedicated to local waters. A tank representing the Charles River Basin includes a liberal sprinkling of beer cans and a rusting shopping cart, which leads officials of the aquarium to note that while some of the human contributions to the harbor and nearby waters are esthetically unappealing, they are not chemically dangerous. Knowledge of Sewage At the entrance to the new exhibit, scheduled to open in March, visitors will confront a computerized survey in which they will be asked questions like ''Do you know where it goes when you flush the toilet?'' For about two million people, the correct answer is Boston Harbor, often without stopping at a treatment plant. Other questions include: ''Would you swim in the harbor? Would you fish in the harbor?'' Sport fishing, in fact, is popular in the harbor, and the harbor has many beaches, although health officials sometimes close them. A map nearby will trace the scores of sewage pipes emptying in the harbor, the bathing beaches and the fishing spots. The treatment is a trifle blunt for the 17-year-old aquarium, which is dominated by more conventional exhibits like a giant pool of frolicking penguins, tanks filled with the exotic denizens of Pacific and Caribbean coral reefs, and dolphin and sea lion shows. The thought of a harbor exhibit at the aquarium, said Steven S. Lenox, the curator of exhibits, probably conjures up visions of the Boston Tea Party, clipper ships, and historic wharf architecture. But Massachusetts has established itself as particularly adept at turning its back on the harbor that for years was the reason for its growth. Through the 1960's and 1970's Boston and neighboring communities largely ignored the mandates from Washington to clean up the harbor, and the region is being dragged into compliance now only because of a suit successfully brought by the City of Quincy, which shares the harbor, and by environmentalist groups. The work will include a major new sewage treatment facility, and the sludge it produces will be dumped far from the harbor, although where is not clear now. Progress to Be Monitored The aquarium, joined by the Massachusetts Audubon Society, Northeastern University and several environmental groups, is also planning a harbor monitoring project, to chart the improvements brought by new sewage treatment facilities, and to convince the public that the effort that will result in sharply higher water and sewer rates is producing results. ''With a concerted effort, we can clean it up over 15 to 25 years,'' Dr. Kaufman said. ''That's short enough for people to see some progress.'' Monthly tests of the water will begin in the spring, and results indicating the health of plant and animal life in the water and the effectiveness of sewage treatment will be issued. While environmentalists have high hopes for the water quality in the first decade of the next century, some parts of the harbor will not be cleaned, notably the sediments, some of which are now legally classified as hazardous wastes. ''A lot of this stuff can never be cleaned up,'' Dr. Kaufman said. ''Once it's in place, we're better off locking the door and walking away quietly.'' The aquarium is also working with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop a computerized model of the mixing action of tides in the harbor. The model will allow aquarium visitors to place sewage pipes in different places in the harbor. ''People from one neighborhood will put it in another neighborhood,'' he said. ''The kick is, no matter where you put it, it stays where you put it. It goes back and forth and back and forth.'' The logic of the existing sewage system was that the tides would flush out the harbor, he said, but the actual effect is more a mixing than a flushing.
