835|1987\01\04|WASHINGTON TALK: Q&A: William Bradford Reynolds; Perception and Reality on Civil Rights|In the aftermath of the racial attack in the Howard Beach section of Queens and because of what many civil rights leaders view as a growing pattern of racially motivated violence around the country, the Department of Justice has found itself accused of failing to enforce the civil rights laws.|In the aftermath of the racial attack in the Howard Beach section of Queens and because of what many civil rights leaders view as a growing pattern of racially motivated violence around the country, the Department of Justice has found itself accused of failing to enforce the civil rights laws. In the aftermath of the racial attack in the Howard Beach section of Queens and because of what many civil rights leaders view as a growing pattern of racially motivated violence around the country, the Department of Justice has found itself accused of failing to enforce the civil rights laws. At the center of such attacks is William Bradford Reynolds, Assistant Attorney General in charge of the civil rights division, a Reagan appointee whose promotion to Associate Attorney General was rejected by the Senate because of complaints about his record on civil rights enforcement. Following are excerpts from an interview with Mr. Reynolds in his office here this week: Q. Some critics have said that under this Justice Department, civil rights enforcement has virtually come to a standstill in housing and employment discrimination, as well as other areas. How do you respond to such criticism? A. Those critics clearly haven't looked at the record. The civil rights enforcement activity in the last year has been greater and more vigorous than it has ever been in the history of the civil rights division. And that's whether you measure it in terms of cases brought, investigations initiated, the kind of relief we are obtaining or numbers of people who are beneficiaries of that relief. The critics shy away from any kind of confrontation with the record or looking at the record, and in very general, broad-based rhetoric, level a charge that has absolutely no basis at all. Q. When you talk about the record, could you be a little more specific? A. We have more criminal prosecutions than ever before, and our success rate is up in the 80 percent level, which is the highest it has ever been. In the Voting Rights Acts enforcement area, we are obtaining more relief that is to the advantage of minorities in this country and their ability to exercise the franchise than you have had at any time in the history of the division. In the employment area, the kinds of cases we are bringing and kind of remedy we are getting, exceeds quite significantly anything that has been gotten by the division anytime in the past. The same is true with housing; we're actually getting to the bottom of housing discrimination. Q. What is the difference in Ku Klux Klan activity now, compared with six or seven years ago? A. We've had major victories in criminal prosecutions against the Klan. We have significantly interfered with, defeated and brought to an end a large measure of Klan activity. That's not to say that we've eliminated the Klan yet in all places where it exists, but it is fair to say we've broken the back of the Klan in terms of any major nucleus of activity. Q. But there is a perception that the division is not actively enforcing civil rights laws. Why is that? A. The perception's there because the political rhetoric controls the attitudes that you have. The man on the street knows what we are doing only to the extent that you get any honest, faithful reporting by the media as to the record of this Administration. It has not been that way. The major media outlets in this country have given an overabundance of attention and prominence to critics who rail in rather broad-based and general ways about the fact that there's a cutback in civil rights enforcement and nobody's doing anything. Q. Some civil rights leaders say the Administration has to bear some blame for the incidents in Howard Beach, at the University of Massachusetts and other racially motivated incidents in recent months. How do you respond to that? A. It is the case that people are always ready to cast blame elsewhere and say that it's somebody else's fault. The reality is that this Administration, in its policies as well as its practices, has had a pro-civil rights enforcement agenda from the beginning. The civil rights program of this Administration is one that has done more to break down the kinds of Howard Beach resistance that we saw in that particular locality and other places in this country than it has to foster that kind of outrageous behavior. Q. If you have segregated housing, doesn't it follow that you will also have a segregated school system and often a segregated workplace? A. If you have a community that discriminates in housing, it will be the case that it is also a community that discriminates in other areas. I think that the root of the problem is that there are people of a mind to discriminate. And where we find that, we have to go after them on all fronts, which is what this Administration has been doing. Q. Do you think you've personally been unjustly maligned? A. This is not an easy job because the issues are controversial, emotional, and people feel very deeply about them. Whenever you are in that kind of a hot seat, a lot that is going to be written about you is driven by where people stand on different sides of the issues. I do think it is unfortunate that as a result of that, a lot of the characterization of me has been sort of as a nasty, insensitive, mean kind of an individual who does not care about these issues or think very deeply about them. That is about as far off the mark as one can get. Q. Is there ever a temptation to lash back? A. No. I've never had that. It would probably be totally counterproductive, but it's not in my nature to react that way. I'm not sure what I'd say if I tried to lash back. Q. You say that you don't lash back or like to engage in personal attacks, but didn't you personally attack Associate Justice William J. Brennan Jr. of the Supreme Court? A. I did not make a personal attack on Justice Brennan. I think the headlines that accused me of that misrepresented and misstated my speech. My speech responded to Justice Brennan's public speeches, which laid out a philosophy that I took issue with. At no time did I attack him personally or suggest there was any lack of respect for the Justice or for the institution. Justice Brennan and I have discussed since, in a very cordial and friendly conversation, and he said he did not regard it as a personal attack and felt it was the kind of debate that appropriately should be carried on. Q. Some Congressional leaders have accused Attorney General Edwin Meese of promoting you to the position of Associate Attorney General, although the Senate rejected your nomination to that post. They cite, for example, your involvement in investigating the Iran arms deal. Are you acting as an Associate?  A. I am one of a number of assistant Attorney Generals, and I do the bidding of the Attorney General. There is nothing at all inappropriate for him to turn to me, or to anybody else in this department to assist on a crash program that needs to be staffed, at the highest levels of the department, in order to achieve something that the President has asked be achieved in an impossible time schedule. I don't think there was anything that occurred during my confirmation hearings that would remove me as a possible candidate for the Attorney General to turn to. LENA WILLIAMS
