836|1987\01\04|MASSACHUSETTS GAINING IN ITS CARE FOR RETARDED|Fourteen years after a lawsuit was filed against the state complaining of poor conditions at state institutions for the mentally retarded, a Federal District Court in Boston has ended its daily supervision of efforts to improve the quality of care.|Fourteen years after a lawsuit was filed against the state complaining of poor conditions at state institutions for the mentally retarded, a Federal District Court in Boston has ended its daily supervision of efforts to improve the quality of care. Fourteen years after a lawsuit was filed against the state complaining of poor conditions at state institutions for the mentally retarded, a Federal District Court in Boston has ended its daily supervision of efforts to improve the quality of care. Judge Joseph L. Tauro, who has presided over the suit from the beginning, said in October that the situation had improved enough for the courts to disengage from the case. As a condition, he required Gov. Michael S. Dukakis to set up an office to supervise compliance with the court-ordered plan to improve the facilities and treatment given at five of seven state schools for the mentally retarded. While the court will still oversee the plan, the state reassumed administration of the schools Tuesday when the Governor set up the Office of Quality Assurance to supervise new construction and renovation, and changes in staffing, programs and administrative policies. The state may also review its 10-year moratorium on admissions to the schools. '21st-Century System of Care' At a ceremony Tuesday at the Walter E. Fernald State School here, Judge Tauro said the court process had taken patients at the facilities from the ''snake pit environment'' that existed at Fernald and the other schools named in the suit - Belchertown, Wrentham and Dever state schools and Monson Developmental Center - ''to a 21st-century system of care.'' Beginning in 1972, families of residents filed a series of civil suits charging that the poor physical environment and treatment violated the residents' rights to humane care in state institutions. Philip J. Corrigan, 68 years old, who has had two children at Fernald for 30 years, was an initiator of the suit. He recalled that his severely retarded son John, 38, ''lived locked up in a ward environment in an extremely severe disciplinary mode.'' ''Given his short attention span,'' Mr. Corrigan said, ''there was no effort made to train him. He vegetated and we watched him regress on a weekly basis.'' Clandestine Visit to School When Judge Tauro received the case in 1972, he visited Belchertown State School unannounced. ''Outside, rolling lawns made it look like a prep school,'' he said in an interview Wednesday. ''But inside, I saw a little girl drinking from a feces-filled commode; bare rooms with no partitions between beds. People were lying on the floor half naked in their own excrement and urine. They had no closets, no doors on toilets.'' ''In another school, I saw 23 blind retarded in one room with one person to supervise, clean, dress and feed them,'' he added. ''There was no elevator in case of fire, and windows didn't work. Young people's bodies were filled with welts from bugs and there was no acoustical relief from constant moaning and screaming.'' The judge said the state had tolerated these conditions because ''the retarded didn't have any political clout.'' ''No matter how good government is, it runs on a crisis basis,'' he said. ''Problems of the retarded were put on the back burner. The lawsuit made it a front-burner problem.'' The state agreed that the conditions were unconstitutional. Each school was inspected and residents were evaluated to determine the treatment and facilities needed. In 1977 the judge issued the first in a series of orders to bring the schools up to Federal standards. The court-ordered plan focused on improving living conditions, hiring a better-trained staff and placing appropriate residents in more independent, but still supervised, homes in nearby communities. $185 Million for Construction Since 1974, $185 million has been spent on 108 new buildings and on renovations, said a spokesman for the Department of Mental Retardation, Krista L. Stanton. Staffing has been increased to 10,904 in 1986 from 6,377 in 1974, while the number of residents has decreased to 3,463 from 6,276, with about 2,800 going into community homes. The operating budget for the schools has risen to $238 million from $53 million, and for the community homes, to $123 million from $6 million. Ten years ago the Fernald school had 1,211 residents and 1,400 staff members. ''Physical restraints and psychotropic drugs were used, clients had to borrow underwear and often stayed in buildings all day,'' recalled Joan Greenstein, an administrator. Now Fernald has 874 residents and 2,483 staff members. ''The environment is clean, clients have their own possessions, there are 1 to 4 in bedrooms,'' Ms. Greenstein said. Mr. Corrigan said: ''In the course of the suit, I managed to have John transferred to a 3,000-acre farm run by Fernald. We can see tremendous physical and mental improvement. Now he gardens and works with horses. Also as a result of Fernald being forced to provide treatment and programming, my daughter, Patricia, 42, who is mildly retarded, is competitively employed at a Federal office near the school. We hope in the future a community residence will be made available to her.'' But the Judge, Governor Dukakis, parents and advocates agree that much remains to be done. Marc F. Lalley, chairman of the Massachusetts Advisory Council for Mental Health and Mental Retardation, said: ''Many individuals in the community or in state hospitals for the mentally ill could benefit from diagnostic and short-term treatment at these schools but admissions have been closed for 10 years. Also, the staff-client ratios should be higher because the clients remaining are now the neediest.'' Mr. Corrigan said: ''Our concern is that the move toward deinstitutionalization does not destroy facilities for those who cannot be placed in the community. Also, the court was our security blanket. If there's backsliding we hope we can get its attention.''
