837|1987\01\04|Third Estate Real Estate|As the Democrats prepare to retake control of the Senate after a six-year hiatus, Capitol Hill watchers report that the transition has been marred by unusual squabbling.|As the Democrats prepare to retake control of the Senate after a six-year hiatus, Capitol Hill watchers report that the transition has been marred by unusual squabbling. As the Democrats prepare to retake control of the Senate after a six-year hiatus, Capitol Hill watchers report that the transition has been marred by unusual squabbling. The matters ostensibly at issue -how much office space the Republicans will retain, which personnel will be replaced - pale by comparison with the larger issues of the day, not the least of them the crisis generated by the Reagan Administration's secret arms deal with Iran. But there is genuine concern that the bickering is symptomatic of growing partisanship that may destroy the comity and courtesy that usually characterize the way senators deal with one another regardless of party. Immediately at issue is the office space occupied by the Republican leader, Bob Dole. As majority leader, Mr. Dole occupied one of the most desirable offices in the Capitol. But, come Tuesday, when the 100th Congress convenes and he steps down to the minority, he will, in effect, be handed a renegotiated lease. ''What we're talking about is prime real estate,'' said Joe Stewart, incoming Senate secretary for the Demcratic majority, who is involved in the delicate task of assigning office space to proud and powerful United States Senators. Mr. Dole has a five-room, 3,740-square-foot office suite on the coveted second floor of the west front of the Capitol, but the incoming majority leader, Robert C. Byrd, says Mr. Dole will have to give up 1,100 feet of it. Mr. Byrd, who makes do with 2,600 square feet, is cutting Mr. Dole back to roughly the same amount, and neither Mr. Dole nor his staff is happy about it. The rifts may seem minor, but some Senate staff members say the underlying conflict is much deeper and grows out of a strong conviction on the part of Senate Democrats that Senator Dole as majority leader made almost all decisions on a partisan basis. Now that the shoe is on the other foot, Democrats say they are restoring institutional parity but Republicans feel they are being punished. WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING
