838|1987\01\04|WITNESS, IN FIRST PUBLIC STATEMENT, ASSAILS INQUIRY INTO QUEENS ATTACK|A black witness who was beaten by whites in the Howard Beach attack said yesterday that the police had disputed and discounted portions of his story from the start, had treated him more like a criminal than a victim and had conducted a ''masquerade investigation.''|A black witness who was beaten by whites in the Howard Beach attack said yesterday that the police had disputed and discounted portions of his story from the start, had treated him more like a criminal than a victim and had conducted a ''masquerade investigation.'' A black witness who was beaten by whites in the Howard Beach attack said yesterday that the police had disputed and discounted portions of his story from the start, had treated him more like a criminal than a victim and had conducted a ''masquerade investigation.'' ''I tried to tell the story and nobody listened to it,'' the witness, Cedric Sandiford, declared at a news conference in Harlem in his first public statement on the case. ''They only wanted to hear part of it and they tried to discredit the other part of it.'' Mr. Sandiford's lawyers have said repeatedly that he told the police he saw a car strike and kill his companion. The police have said Mr. Sandiford told them he did not see the crash. Mr. Sandiford, who has refused to cooperate with prosecutors, gave no new details on circumstances surrounding the death of his stepson, Michael Griffith, who was struck and killed on the Shore Parkway as he fled a beating by white youths in Howard Beach, Queens, early Dec. 20. But he said the police who picked him up on the highway where Mr. Griffith was killed had refused to listen to his account of the attack, had not offered him medical attention for injuries sustained in the beating and had questioned him about a shooting in Queens. At the scene of the crash, he said, he stood by and was ignored for three and a half hours, then was taken to the 106th Precinct station house and searched. After telling his story to investigators, he said, a police supervisor told him, ''It didn't happen that way.'' Shooting Inquiry Acknowledged Alice T. McGillion, the Deputy Police Commissioner in charge of public information, denied Mr. Sandiford's allegations. She said investigators had not disputed or discounted his story and the police had treated him ''like a victim and a very important witness.'' She said that Mr. Sandiford was asked ''numerous times'' if he wanted medical attention and ''he refused it numerous times.'' The police nevertheless called an ambulance and Mr. Sandiford agreed to go to Jamaica Hospital for treatment only after the ambulance crew asked him to sign a waiver releasing them from responsibility. Ms. McGillion acknowledged that the officers who picked Mr. Sandiford up on the parkway ''asked him if he knew anything'' about a shooting that had just occurred nearby, but she added: ''He was never treated as a suspect'' in that case, which turned out to be a shooting in a drug dispute. Flanked by his lawyers and other blacks at the crowded news conference at the Abyssinian Baptist Church, Mr. Sandiford said he was ''disappointed'' with Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, Governor Cuomo and others for attempting to ''discredit my lawyer.'' Mr. Sandiford said it was his decision, not that of his principal lawyer, Alton H. Maddox Jr., to refuse to cooperate with the police and Queens District Attorney John J. Santucci in the prosecution of three white youths charged with reckless endangerment in the case. Murder and other serious charges against them were dropped last Monday after Mr. Sandiford refused to testify at a preliminary hearing. Mr. Sandiford, a 36-year-old Brooklyn resident who spoke forcefully with the Caribbean lilt of his native Guyana, echoed Mr. Maddox's call for a special prosecutor to supersede Mr. Santucci. ''Until Governor Cuomo assigns someone to investigate this case,'' he declared, ''I won't cooperate with no one. That's all I have to say.'' When reporters attempted to ask him whether he saw Mr. Griffith struck by the car, his lawyers intervened and said they would not permit him to answer questions about key aspects of the case because doing so might compromise any independent inquiry. Getting the 'System to Work' Mr. Sandiford spoke for less than 10 minutes with reporters in a cramped meeting room on the third floor of the church, at 132 West 138th Street between Lenox and Seventh Avenues, and his lawyers, Mr. Maddox and C. Vernon Mason, and several supporters dominated the two-hour news conference. The lawyers were asked whether their priority was the prosecution of the white youths or a broader effort to attack racism and organize and assist the black community. ''The priority,'' Mr. Mason said, ''is to get the system to work.'' Later, he told a reporter: ''This is bigger than Michael Griffith. We have an agenda to make sure there are no more Michael Griffiths.'' Asked what they would do to assure the prosecution of the case if an independent prosecutor were not appointed, Mr. Mason said, ''We're not going to tell you what we're going to do.'' The lawyers berated political leaders, the police, prosecutors, the courts and segments of the news media, saying that they perpetuated a racist system in which justice was denied to blacks. ''We are engaged in a system that expects lawyers to participate in coverups, to participate in the injustice that pervades the courts in this state,'' Mr. Maddox said. If a lawyer refuses, he said, ''then that person becomes the butt or the target of a new lynch mob.'' As another example, the lawyers cited a 17-year-old black spectator, David Vandiver, who they said was struck in the mouth by a white player at a basketball game at the College of Staten Island last Tuesday. They said that despite the youth's complaint, the police had refused to press charges. The police said officers had noted the complaint and referred him to court to press a charge because a coach, an assistant coach and another school official had told them the white player had not struck the black spectator. They said the police had discretion to refer cases to court if they involve no serious injury or criminal conduct. The lawyers, criticizing coverage of the Howard Beach affair by the ''establishment media,'' said they would rely on the black media to ''report to our people'' on the Howard Beach affair and called for a black boycott of ''establishment media.'' In addition, the lawyers called for a black boycott of pizzerias throughout the city. It was outside the New Park Pizzeria, at Cross Bay Boulevard and 157th Avenue in Howard Beach, that the whites first attacked Mr. Griffth, Mr. Sandiford and Timothy Grimes, according to the police account. Mr. Grimes escaped after being hit once. The other men were chased eight blocks and beaten again at 156th Avenue and 86th Street before fleeing through a hole in a fence onto the Shore Parkway, where Mr. Griffith was struck by a car driven by Dominick Blum, 24, a court officer. Mr. Blum left the scene, returned and was not charged after he told the police he thought he had hit a tire or an animal. According to the police account, Mr. Sandiford told them he saw a dark car twice in the episode, once during the chase and again on the parkway, but they quoted him as having said he did not witness the fatal crash. The police also have said their investigation showed Mr. Blum was not an accomplice of the white youths and that he had killed Mr. Griffith accidentally. Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason have given a sharply conflicting version, saying that Mr. Sandiford saw the crash and that Mr. Blum was a willing accomplice. They have charged repeatedly that the police and prosecutors were suppressing part of Mr. Sandiford's story in an effort to cover up for Mr. Blum and the white youths. Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason have not provided detailed evidence to support their allegations. Governor Cuomo has asked Charles J. Hynes, a Deputy Attorney General who is the state's Special Prosecutor for the Criminal Justice System in New York City, to look into the lawyers' allegations that the police and prosecutors have mishandled the case. Mr. Maddox and Mr. Mason said they would not cooperate with Mr. Hynes unless an independent prosecutor was named.
