839|1987\01\04|INVESTIGATORS SIFT HOTEL FOR CLUES IN SAN JUAN FIRE|The police received a threat of a bomb at the Dupont Plaza Hotel two hours before the fire that took at least 95 lives here on New Year's Eve, a high police official said today. But investigators said they had found no physical evidence that there had been a bomb.|The police received a threat of a bomb at the Dupont Plaza Hotel two hours before the fire that took at least 95 lives here on New Year's Eve, a high police official said today. But investigators said they had found no physical evidence that there had been a bomb. The police received a threat of a bomb at the Dupont Plaza Hotel two hours before the fire that took at least 95 lives here on New Year's Eve, a high police official said today. But investigators said they had found no physical evidence that there had been a bomb. Robert J. Creighton, the special agent in charge of the New York office of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, whose office has jurisdiction over Puerto Rico, said finding evidence of a bomb could be a slow process. ''A fire scene is extremely fragile,'' he said. ''You can't use a bulldozer. Agents have to work with sifting screens and microscopes to examine little pieces because even a tiny piece of a battery or a watch face could mean an awful lot.'' 'No Problems,' Officers Told Jose L. Lopez, senior spokesman for the commonwealth's Police Department, said the threat that a bomb had been planted on the premises of the 22-story hotel was made in a telephone call to a police station near the hotel at 1:41 P.M. Wednesday. The caller identified himself as ''Santiago,'' Mr. Lopez said. In 15 minutes, he said, two officers were dispatched to the Dupont Plaza, where they were told by members of the hotel staff that ''there were no problems, everything was normal.'' The officers, Mr. Lopez said, ''went back to the station and made a report.'' About an hour and a half later, at 3:30 P.M., the fire broke out. Mr. Lopez said he had not read that report but indicated that the officers might well have decided the warning was an unfounded threat. Hotel 'Looking Into It' A spokesman for the hotel, Rissig Licha, said he did not know if the hotel's staff members spoke with the police about the bomb threat on Wednesday or if they checked with management before sending the police officers away. ''We're looking into it,'' he said. If the staff members had spoken with the officers, he added, ''they should have notified the management.'' As forensic teams worked today to identify those killed in the blaze and searchers once more hunted for victims in the hotel, the body count remained at 95. Danny Velez, a spokesman for Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon, said, ''We hope there are no more.'' It was erroneously reported on Friday that one of the victims was Margaret Ahrens, a soprano who is a prominent performer of contemporary music in New York. Although the list of victims includes a Margaret Ahrens of Oceanside, L.I., she is not the musician and composer. Reports conflicted today on how many of the people injured in the blaze remained hospitalized. The Secretary of State's office released a list of 21 people still hospitalized, while the Secretary of Health's office said 34 remained in hospitals, some of them in serious condition. A few of the injured are suffering burns, and the rest are being treated for smoke inhalation and trauma. Teams from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Federal firearms bureau and the Justice Department held a two-and-a-half-hour meeting this morning on coordinating their operations. Mr. Creighton of the firearms bureau said the investigation was focusing on ''several points of interest'' on the first floor of the hotel and below the casino. Investigators, he said, ''try to read the fire, the blast effects, looking for burn patterns and shearing effects on metal that could indicate an explosion.'' Looking for 'Starting Point' ''They will look for the seat of any explosion, the starting point,'' he said. Two Federal investigators who declined to be identified, as well as a local fire official, Juan R. Garcia, said it seemed doubtful at this point that a bomb had caused the fire. The explosions witnesses and survivors heard Wednesday afternoon, investigators suggested, could have been windows breaking under the pressure created by the fire. ''We still believe it was arson,'' one investigator said, ''but the thinking now is, it looks almost like a prank that got out of hand.'' Hector Rivera Cruz, Puerto Rico's Secretary of Justice, declined today to say whether bomb fragments had been found. He also said no clear evidence of arson had been found, while saying that arson was the most likely cause of the blaze. Mr. Rivera Cruz said ''more than 150 witnesses'' had been questioned and that evidence was being removed from the charred building. No arrests have been made, according to the Police Superintendent, Carlos Lopez Feliciano. Another Warning Is Reported In addition to the police disclosure of the bomb threat, a report of a separate warning was published on the front page of The San Juan Star this morning. The newspaper quoted ''a reliable source'' in the island government as saying three men had told the Special Investigations Bureau of the commonwealth's Justice Department about a warning they had received. The men, who were not identified in the article, said a union official had told them Wednesday to ''get out'' of the hotel casino ''right now because things are going to happen any minute now,'' the newspaper reported. The article said the union official added: ''We are either going to close this hotel down or some people are going to get killed.'' The article said the warning came ''about 10 or 15 minutes'' before the fire. Mr. Rivera Cruz declined today to comment on the report. A meeting of about 125 members of Local 901 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, which represents the hotel employees, concluded just before the fire broke out. Local and Federal investigators have speculated that a labor-management dispute at the Dupont Plaza may have played a part in the disaster. Asked today about The Star's report, Jose E. Cadiz, the president of the teamsters' local, said the union leadership knew nothing about plans to bomb or set fire to the hotel or about any prior warnings. In heated contract negotiations, he said, ''People do things, say things, make threats on their own.'' 'Always Negotiating' Negotiations with the management on a new contract, he said, had actually been going well. Although members had voted Dec. 22 in favor of a strike, he said, ''we were convinced we were not going to have a strike - the vote was more of a bargaining chip.'' Mr. Cadiz said that in the six years he had headed the 5,200-member union there had been only one strike, and no violence. The union has 150 contracts, he said, and is ''always negotiating.'' Army pathologists and other forensic specialists are performing autopsies and trying to identify the dead through fingerprints or by comparing teeth with dental records, or from jewelry and traces of clothing. Harry Gaynor, president of the National Burn Victims Foundation in Orange, N.J., said in an interview here today that positive identification was extremely difficult after fires as severe as the one at the Dupont Plaza. Praise for Searchers People who have been removing bodies from the fire rubble, he said, are victims themselves, psychologically, and are being overlooked. ''Even if they think they are macho guys who can handle this, experience shows that's not so,'' he said. ''They may suffer from depression nightmares. They may start to drink and smoke. They should be provided with counseling.'' Mr. Gaynor criticized the hotel's management for not installing a sprinkler system throughout the building. ''No one has ever lost their life in a sprinkled building,'' he said. ''It's a vital safety feature that was lacking. There's a message here.'' Hotel spokesmen have acknowledged that sprinklers were in place in only three isolated locations, adding that local regulations did not require more of the devices.
