84|1987\01\01|Dollar Slides Sharply; Gold Surges Past $400|The dollar closed out the year on a sour note yesterday, falling sharply to new six-year lows against the West German mark and other European currencies. Traders sold dollars in response to November's record-shattering trade deficit.|The dollar closed out the year on a sour note yesterday, falling sharply to new six-year lows against the West German mark and other European currencies. Traders sold dollars in response to November's record-shattering trade deficit. The dollar closed out the year on a sour note yesterday, falling sharply to new six-year lows against the West German mark and other European currencies. Traders sold dollars in response to November's record-shattering trade deficit. Meanwhile, gold prices, which have been flat for the last few sessions, rose by $14.60 an ounce, to $404.90, in a holiday-shortened trading session at the New York Commodity Exchange. The Republic National Bank in New York quoted a final gold bid for the day of $404 a troy ounce, up from $390 Tuesday. The dollar headed into the new year more than 25 percent lower, on average, than at the end of 1985. The American currency fell steadily during 1986, following the September 1985 decision of the major industrial powers to realign currencies in order to reduce the dollar's value and make American exports more competitive. The dollar's decline yesterday was recorded on light trading. But analysts and traders said the slide presaged a further selloff in the new year. ''People thought that the beginning of 1987 would see a renewed push on the dollar,'' sending it lower, said Richard E. Witten, a vice president in foreign exchange at Goldman, Sachs & Company. ''But today people were just trying to jump the gun.'' Near the end of the day, the dollar was bid at 1.9190 marks, down 1.5 percent from Tuesday's close. The dollar also reached a new low against the Swiss franc, as it fell to 1.6095 yesterday, down 1 percent from Tuesday. Compared with its performance against European currencies, the dollar's decline against the yen was relatively modest. The yen, which has risen by more than 50 percent against the dollar since the end of 1984, was quoted at 158.19 to the dollar, up slightly from Tuesday's close of 159.95. Trade Figure Comes As Shock Mr. Witten and other traders said that the bulk of the day's activity came within 20 minutes after the November trade figures were announced by the Commerce Department. The $19.2 billion deficit came as a shock; many experts had been expecting a figure in the $14 billion range. ''If the trade number had been in the $14 billion area, the dollar would have been a little stronger,'' Mr. Witten said. ''But when it came out it told traders not to close their books on the dollar yet.'' While a drop in the dollar generally helps gold prices, yesterday's surge was unexpected, according to some analysts. ''Gold has been quiet for the past couple of days, in spite of a falling dollar and rising oil prices,'' said John P. Norris, vice president at Citibank Precious Metals. ''But what happened today came as a little bit of a surprise to most of the trade.'' Mr. Norris said that technical factors, and a delayed reaction in the precious metals markets to the dollar's recent decline, were the main reasons for gold's rise yesterday. The continued fall of the dollar against the German mark prompted the Bundesbank's president, Karl Otto Pohl, to say yesterday that further declines would not be in the best interests of the United States, and could pose risks for economic growth in Germany and throughout Europe. In spite of Mr. Pohl's comments, traders remain convinced that further declines are ahead. ''The emerging trend is that the dollar has to decline more,'' Mr. Witten said, ''say another 5 percent against the mark over the next three months.''  CURRENCY MARKETS
