840|1987\01\04|PROTESTERS EXPRESS FRUSTRATION AND MISTRUST|They had seen it all before, the protesters said - white assailants, black victims and justice continually deferred.|They had seen it all before, the protesters said - white assailants, black victims and justice continually deferred. They had seen it all before, the protesters said - white assailants, black victims and justice continually deferred. There was William Turks, they said, a black man who was chased and killed by a group of whites in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn. Then Eleanor Bumpurs and Michael Stewart, even an honors student, Edmund Perry - all killed, they said, in racially motivated attacks involving the police. Now, the protesters said yesterday, the spectre of racism has been raised in another death, and they had gathered at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem to rally against the racial hatred they said had left Michael Griffith dead in Howard Beach, Queens. ''Civil rights hasn't improved anything for blacks,'' said Raenice Goode, a black woman who is a member of the Eleanor Bumpurs Committee. ''This kind of thing happens all the time.'' The attack and death of Mr. Griffith, many blacks say, has renewed deep-seated frustrations and anger among blacks at law-enforcement officials, the government, news organizations and whites in general. In a small, third-floor room adjacent to the church, the lawyers for the two surviving victims of the Howard Beach attack held a news conference and called for a movement for black empowerment, including boycotts of pizza parlors and ''insensitive'' news organizations. ''In the future, we will reward our friends and punish our enemies,'' said one of the lawyers, Alton H. Maddox Jr. Next door, blacks from communities throughout the city spoke of mass meetings, youth demonstrations and picketing. After the two-hour rally ended, about 50 high school and college students marched to Gracie Mansion to denounce Mayor Koch and other city officials. Some chanted, ''Howard Beach is America.'' Others carried signs, some of which read, ''Justice will be done'' and ''Stop Racist Attitudes or Else.'' ''Do not venture into unfamiliar neighborhoods or hostile territories,'' Lisa Williamson, head of the National African Youth Student Alliance, told the crowd. Not in small numbers, she added. ''Be realistic. Carry a stick, stone, or a weapon.'' Many at the rally complained of the way law-enforcement officials have handled the Howard Beach assault and other cases. Although the circumstances and legal results differed markedly, many said they saw the Turks, Bumpurs, Stewart and Perry deaths in the same light as the Howard Beach attack. All too often, they said, the legal system fails to provide justice when blacks are victims. Six transit police officers were acquitted of any wrongdoing in the case of Mr. Stewart, who died after being taken into custody on charges of painting graffiti in a subway station. Mr. Perry was shot by a police officer who said Mr. Perry had tried to mug him. No charges were brought against the officer. The officer who shot Mrs. Bumpurs in a confrontation over an eviction goes on trial Jan. 12 on manslaughter charges. Three youths were convicted in the beating death of Mr. Turks. ''You can look at life in the inner city as a game of monopoly,'' said Michael Maechem, who attended the rally. ''Whenever blacks start winning, they change the rules. The 106th Precinct is the stun-gun precinct. They already have no credibility.'' Two officers from the 106th were convicted in 1986 of using a stun gun on black prisoners, and charges against three other officers are pending.
