841|1987\01\04|THE MARK OF A DUMB PENALTY|IN the end, the Jets lost to the Browns, 23-20, after 17 minutes 2 seconds of overtime, the most theatrical game the Jets have ever played that they didn't win. And of the 225 plays in this Super Bowl XXI playoff, the Jets later talked mostly of only one - a roughing-the-passer penalty against Mark Gastineau that revived the|IN the end, the Jets lost to the Browns, 23-20, after 17 minutes 2 seconds of overtime, the most theatrical game the Jets have ever played that they didn't win. And of the 225 plays in this Super Bowl XXI playoff, the Jets later talked mostly of only one - a roughing-the-passer penalty against Mark Gastineau that revived the IN the end, the Jets lost to the Browns, 23-20, after 17 minutes 2 seconds of overtime, the most theatrical game the Jets have ever played that they didn't win. And of the 225 plays in this Super Bowl XXI playoff, the Jets later talked mostly of only one - a roughing-the-passer penalty against Mark Gastineau that revived the Browns with less than 4 minutes remaining. ''It wasn't roughing,'' Gastineau would say. ''I was just following through.'' At the time the Jets were in command, 20-10, and the Browns were backed up on their own 18-yard line. In a second-and-24, Bernie Kosar threw a pass. Incomplete. But just as the ball skidded off the ground upfield, Referee Ben Dreith's yellow handkerchief was floating to the ground near where Kosar had been leveled, slammed in the back by the Jets' 265-pound defensive end. ''It was definitely roughing the passer,'' Kosar said later. ''I thought I'd been broken in two.'' ''He's a referee,'' said Marty Lyons, the Jets' other defensive end, ''who's known to take care of the quarterback.'' ''I couldn't stop,'' Gastineau added. ''I've done that a lot of times without it being called.'' Joe Walton, the Jets' coach, would say only, ''It was a very key play, Mark was just trying to do the best he could do.'' But the Jets' defensive coordinator, Bud Carson, did not excuse Gastineau's mistake. ''I felt it was so dumb,'' Carson said. ''It was really dumb, but in fairness to Mark, he's had very little conditioning lately.'' Gastineau was wearing a brace on his damaged left knee that kept him out of the last five games of the regular season. Carson seemed to be saying that if Gastineau had been playing on a stable knee, he might have been able to stop instead of smashing into the Browns' passer. But the defensive coordinator also put the penalty in perspective. ''We had a lot of situations in which we've been aggressive, but not smart aggressive,'' Carson said. ''We've never quite found out how to play smart aggressive.'' Instead of being confronted with a third-and-24 at their own 18, the Browns suddenly had a new life, a first down at their 33. From there, Kosar, who would complete 33 of 64 passes for 489 yards, positioned Kevin Mack's 1-yard touchdown that lifted the Browns to 20-17. In the final seconds Kosar's 37-yard pass preceded Mark Moseley's tying 22-yard field goal with 7 seconds remaining. And after having missed a 23-yard chip shot early in the overtime, Moseley's 27-yard field goal in overtime ended the strangest season in the Jets' history. In a sense, yesterday's loss mirrored the Jets' season. Just as they hurried to a 10-1 start in their schedule, they were ahead, 20-10, and just as they finished in an 0-5 slump, they finished weakly in the sunny chill of Municipal Stadium. For all the Jets' complaints about the Gastineau penalty, after that penalty their offense with Ken O'Brien at quarterback couldn't generate any yardage and their defense couldn't stop Kosar's offense. O'Brien, benched a week ago when Ryan inspired the Jets to their 35-10 wild-card victory over the Kansas City Chiefs, had returned in the second quarter with the Jets trailing, 10-7. Pat Ryan limped off with a damaged groin muscle that he had pulled in the warm-up. ''It's frustrating, coming away with nothing,'' O'Brien said. ''That's the whole thing, you come away with nothing. Who cares how long you play.'' O'Brien completed 11 of 19 passes for 134 yards after Ryan had hit 6 of 11 for 103 yards. But in the overtime, O'Brien appeared to be as helpless as he had been in the Jets' 0-5 finish. In three series in the overtime, he generated only 19 net yards as the Jets punted from their 41, 38 and 14. Kosar, meanwhile, was strafing the Jets' defense for the Jets' sixth loss in their last seven games. In shattering Otto Graham's club playoff record of 297 passing yards, set in the 1950 championship victory over the Los Angeles Rams, the poised 23-year-old quarterback had only one bad moment, an interception in the end zone by Russell Carter, the Jets' right cornerback, early in the fourth quarter. ''That's Bernie Kosar,'' said Marty Schottenheimer, the Browns' coach. ''He's a championship player.'' Two years ago Kosar passed the University of Miami to the final No. 1 ranking in college football. And next Sunday he has an opportunity to pass the Browns to the American Conference title against the winner of today's divisional playoff at Denver between the Broncos and the New England Patriots. But on their winning drive in overtime, the Browns fooled the Jets by calling seven running plays against a defense designed to stop Kosar's passes. ''They called a lot of trap plays,'' Marty Lyons said. ''When you've got all those defensive backs in there, you don't have that strength in the middle that you need to stop the run. It was excellent play calling on their part. Our defensive game plan was to put a lot of pressure on Kosar, to shut down their running and to control the line of scrimmage. We played good for 56 minutes, but we forgot the last 4 minutes.'' And when the third longest game in pro football history ended, Lyons sat on the dirt field for several seconds. ''I couldn't believe we had lost,'' he would say later. ''We had worked so hard all year, we had worked so hard all week, we had worked so hard all day.'' But when Mark Gastineau's penalty gave the Browns new life, they won a game that the Jets might have won and should have won. SPORTS OF THE TIMES
