843|1987\01\04|AROUND THE GARDEN|This Week:|This Week: This Week: On cold nights, move tender house plants away from windowsills. . . . Cut back long canes of roses so they do not whip in high winds. . . . Do not overfeed house plants at this time of year as many of them are resting or what is called semi-dormant. Protection Although it is January, there is still time to use anti-transpirants on the foliage of evergreens, particularly rhododendrons, hollies and evergreen azaleas. Even special conifers with their needled foliage benefit from these sprays. The sprays are invisible coatings to prevent sunburn and desiccation when winds howl and the sun bakes. Just be sure the air temperture is warm - above 40 degrees - so the leaves will dry off before nightfall and the spray equipment will not clog. Clean Them Out New catalogues from seed houses and nurseries are filling up mail boxes. The old ones must be tossed to make room. But be judicious about throwing out the old for the new. Some catalogues are generous with cultural pointers and garden planning; others are resplendent with pictures and serve as good reference material when particular plants bloom. They help to recall, ''What was that we ordered?'' Also remember some catalogues will not arrive by mail if the company has not received an order in the last year or two. Mailing and publishing has become expensive and many companies are cutting their lists if potential customers do not respond. Hard to Find Some garden tools and accessories are hard to find. Even though gardeners are diligent about pouring through source catalogues, some products don't seem to exist. Or do they? A few special mail order catalogues offer these obscure items. If particular products are needed, these may be worth adding to the source library. For those who own home greenhouses, proper tools and supplies are a must. Gro-Tek, South Berwick, Maine 03908 (catalogue $1.) offers many greenhouse and garden supplies. This is the place to find a 50-foot watering hose ($9.50) or trickle irrigation kits ($14.95). The catalogue also lists labels, sunshades, greenhouses glazing, fans, thermostats and quantity shipments of plastic pots and flats. Walt F. Nicke's ''Garden Talk'' catalogue (19 Columbia Turnpike, Hudson, N.Y. 12534, 50 cents) includes long-sought tools and accessories, many of them imports from European manufacturers. The extraordinary plant supports of galvanized wire made by Scottish War Blinded are available in several sizes with sets of three legs ranging in heights from 18-inches to 3 feet. Solo sprayers from England with slide-type double action are under $25. From Denmark are stainless steel hand tools; a set of three is $7.95. The Necessary Trading Company, New Castle, Va. 24127 publishes its ''newsalogue'' twice a year. Their search is ''to find better tools and techniques for managing Earth's precious resources'' . . . and offering ''products for non-toxic lifestyles.'' The company lists hard-to-find items such as diatomaceous earth for insect control (one pound $3.75) and Bonide Sulfur Fungicide, a wettable sulfur product at $4 a pound. Mellinger's, 2310 West South Range Road, North Lima, Ohio 44452 offers just about everything in its catalogue. Its index starts with abelia and finishes with a zone map. In between the 104 pages are listings for plants, fertilizers, pruning and grafting tools, insecticides, trellises, weed controls and seeds. This is a veritable supply house for the home gardener as well as small-scale nurseryman. QuestionsAnswers BLACK LEAVES Many leaves on our gardenia have turned black, but the plant is full of flower buds. What shall we do? Mrs. W.W., Manhattan. Control the mealybugs. The black leaves are a secondary problem called black sooty mold which forms on the ''honeydew'' exuded by mealybugs. The insects should be controlled first before the fungus problem can be cleared up. Look on backs of leaves and in leaf axils for these insects which appear as white cottony masses. If badly infested, the plant can be turned upside down and hosed off in the kitchen sink using fingers to rub off the insects. (Hold the soil ball secure with one hand.) After cleaning the gardenia, spray the plant every three to four days with a household insecticide labeled for mealybug control. The plant should bloom normally. For mild infestations, wipe off insects individually with a cotton swab dipped in rubbing alcohol. The blackened leaves should also be wiped clean with a damp paper towel. Mealybug is a form of scale which feeds on the sugar rich sap of many plants. Its population builds up as the insect is rarely seen unless leaves are turned over or leaf axils are checked. Sooty molds can also develop from the sap feeding of other house plant insects including scale, white fly and aphids. IMPATIENS This year we want to grow our own impatiens from seed. When should we begin indoors to be sure of having blooming-size plants to set out in the garden in early May? G.L.L., Morristown, N.J. Plan on three months. Impatiens seed is slow to germinate and the plants should have at least 10 weeks to grow indoors to be sturdy enough to plant outside. Another important step, never cover impatiens seed as it needs light to germinate. It will not ''come up'' for about two weeks. Keep the seed pots or pans warm. The pot or pan can be slipped into a plastic bag to keep moisture uniform. Transplant the seedlings to individual pots when the second pair of true leaves appears. IVY ON TREES Ivy is growing on the trunks of my oak and maple trees, which I find quite attractive. Is this harmful? Should it be removed? C.E.H., Demarest, N.J. No. Ivy growing up tree trunks can be decorative. It clings by tendrils which permit the climber to hold fast. Watch over the vine, however. If it becomes rampant and grows too thickly, it can be a destructive nuisance and may have to be pulled down. Address questions to Garden News, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N. Y. 10036. Those of general interest are published.
