844|1987\01\04|Moseley Glad He Got the Message|Six weeks ago Mark Moseley, a laid-off professional kicker, was leaving a television show in New York when a clerk handed him a message from Art Modell, the owner of the Cleveland Browns.|Six weeks ago Mark Moseley, a laid-off professional kicker, was leaving a television show in New York when a clerk handed him a message from Art Modell, the owner of the Cleveland Browns. Six weeks ago Mark Moseley, a laid-off professional kicker, was leaving a television show in New York when a clerk handed him a message from Art Modell, the owner of the Cleveland Browns. ''Right, sure,'' Moseley said to himself and pocketed the slip of paper, sure it was a crank call. Moseley had been cut by the Washington Redskins six weeks before and the 38-year-old veteran was beginning to think that his career really was over. But back at his hotel Moseley had second thoughts and he picked up the phone. A good thing for the Browns, who that day had lost their regular kicker. This afternoon, during an emotional roller-coaster of an American Conference playoff game, Moseley kicked the winning field goal 2 minutes 2 seconds into the second overtime to end the third longest game in professional football history. ''Marty came up to me and simply said, 'Go kick it, and let's go home,' '' Moseley said, referring to Marty Schottenheimer, the Browns' coach. Holder Almost Misses Call Even then something nearly went wrong. Moseley's holder, Jeff Gossett, the punter, did not hear the hurried call of 'Kick, Kick' and barely made it on to the field to hold. Early in the first 15-minute overtime, it looked as if Moseley might have squandered the game when he missed a 23-yarder. ''I don't know what happened,'' he said. ''It was soft there. As I hit the ball, I was falling away from it. I nearly missed the ball completely. I knew right away it was bad. You have to be strong enough to accept the failures and get ready for the next chance.'' The groans by the Browns fans in the crowd of 78,106, starved for a playoff victory since 1969, confirmed his worst fears. But the defense kept stopping the Jets. ''I've never experienced or seen a comeback like that,'' said Schottenheimer. ''Just before we said our prayer in the locker room afterwards, I told the players to listen. You could still hear the people cheering for us.'' Jets Tougher Than Expected ''The Jets were tougher than we expected,'' said Ozzie Newsome, the tight end. ''Much tougher. But Bernie took us down. He got that look in his eye. And we all knew we could do it.'' Kosar said he watched his alma mater, the University of Miami, lose Friday night in the Fiesta Bowl with Vinny Testaverde, who is two weeks older than Kosar, being intercepted five times. The 23-year-old Kosar's 1.9 percent regular season interception rate (10 interceptions on 531 attempts) was the lowest in the league. But today the Jets picked off two passes, both in the fourth quarter. ''I didn't lose my confidence,'' Kosar said, ''Of course, the thought crossed my mind, but I didn't want to end that way.'' Newsome said the offense sensed Kosar's poise. With less than four minutes remaining in regular time, the Browns were down 10 points when Kosar marched them for a touchdown and a field goal. ''Four minutes seemed like a long time,'' Kosar said. ''It sure did look like an uphill battle,'' said defensive back Frank Minnifield, ''Like everyone else in the stadium, I started getting that sinking feeling. But once we got into overtime there was no doubt in my mind we'd win.'' Browns 3 for 3 in Overtime This was the third Browns overtime game and third overtime victory this year. ''I've been on some good teams,'' Moseley said. ''And this is a good team. It has character. After two interceptions, a lot of young quarterbacks would have started talking to themselves on the sidelines. You'll see that kid around here for a very long time.'' Moseley himself might not be around next year if Matt Bahr returns from injury. Asked about his miss in overtime, his third miss of the day, Moseley said: ''I'd sure hate for that to have been my last shot. That would have been a heavy burden to carry around. I just went over to the sideline and said a little prayer and asked for another chance. This team is so close-knit. And we got it.'' Kosar answered reporters' questions, grabbed a quick shower and left, clutching, not a game ball, but a 1986 Ohio license plate from his car. The plate had expired, but time had not. ''I don't want to get in any trouble,'' said the winning quarterback.
