845|1987\01\04|EXOTIC TEXTILES|Over the last 14 years, Pierre Apraxine has acquired his collection of more than a score of exotic textiles - from an ancient Egyptian applique of a baboon-god to a 1910 peacock-patterned sarong from Java. Now these weavings are being exhibited together for the first time in ''Textiles from the Collection of Pierre Apraxine,'' on view through Jan.|Over the last 14 years, Pierre Apraxine has acquired his collection of more than a score of exotic textiles - from an ancient Egyptian applique of a baboon-god to a 1910 peacock-patterned sarong from Java. Now these weavings are being exhibited together for the first time in ''Textiles from the Collection of Pierre Apraxine,'' on view through Jan. Over the last 14 years, Pierre Apraxine has acquired his collection of more than a score of exotic textiles - from an ancient Egyptian applique of a baboon-god to a 1910 peacock-patterned sarong from Java. Now these weavings are being exhibited together for the first time in ''Textiles from the Collection of Pierre Apraxine,'' on view through Jan. 16 at the Martin and Ullman Artweave Textile Gallery, 310 Riverside Drive, at 103d Street. After the show closes, Mr. Apraxine plans to sell his collection. The exhibition may be small but its range is uncommonly wide. The 22 selections include works from Asia, the Middle East, Europe and South America that are as varied in their cultural expression as in the techniques of weaving, dying and stitchery employed and the forms represented. Dramatizing the splendid high-ceilinged Art Deco spaces of this gallery are wall hangings, bed coverings, curtains, shawls, robes, sarongs, jackets, a hat and an arresting example of a thermal undergarment. Mr. Apraxine, art curator of the Gilman Paper Company, explained last weekend that what he had initially experienced as a collecting adventure had run its course. The ''life cycle'' of accumulating these weavings is probably now over for him, he said. At the outset, he recalled, each textile was a discovery that told him something about the history of weaving and something about his own responses to this art form. He said he was attracted to the first weaving that he purchased - a 19th-century Uzbekistan hanging - while working as an assistant curator in contenporary painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art. ''I saw in this textile a random disposition of color,'' Mr. Apraxine said. ''The harmony that resulted reminded me of what Sol LeWitt was doing at the time, when he was using five colors and random lines.'' The Central Asian ikat weaving, a silk warp on white cotton, boldly patterned with gourds of different shapes and sizes in purple, red and blue, is an unusually bold and simple application in weaving of the traditional printed paisley motifs. With his second purchase, Mr. Apraxine said, the references changed from art to life. The Uzbekistan work he chose, a silk embroidered hanging covered with tiny blossoms, is as wildly colorful as a field of flowers in summer. ''Basically my origins are Russian - way back we came from Mongolia,'' he said. ''That flower-covered textile rang a bell; I felt it belonged to me.'' After that, the references were sometimes personal and sometimes intellectual. ''My eye is trained in form by contemporary art, and so it is applying that understanding that gives the collection a kind of unity,'' he said. Mr. Apraxine's textiles frequently combine complex figural patterns with rich textures. One of the more intricate uses of patterns is a Sino-Tibetan tanka, woven between the 15th and 17th centuries, a silk embroidered work with brocade borders framing stitched images of rams, aquatic monsters, dancing goddesses and a Buddha. The iconography of this work is Tibetan but the craftmanship is Chinese - a rare combination. The most important work in the show - a Ming 17th-century Chinese silk tapestry depicting wild birds, deer, exotic flowers and trees -glows with irridescence from the peacock feathers used in its weaving. Mr. Apraxine's partiality to textiles that were made to be worn outnumber the rest of the pieces and include several stunning kimonos, as well as robes, shawls, jackets and tunics. Among these garments are some of the most exquisitely delicate textiles in the show - gossamer works embellished with bold images that result in magical contrasts. Gold brocade leaves grace the arms and back of a gauze-fine Japanese 18th-century Noh costume. The five pieces in a set of pre-Columbian ritual weavings - a hat, mantle, turban, band and loin cloth worn by a Chimu lord of the 14th or 15th century - are white-on-white cotton works patterned with pelicans and large dots. Textures dominate on some works, including a pre-Columbian hat dating to possibly 600 A.D. that combines a crocheted wool cap and micro-braids of human hair. Another offbeat selection is an 18th-century Chinese thermal jacket, fashioned from bamboo tubes and cotton cord, that was conceived to be worn as insulation between layers of garments. Among the simplest works are two Egyptian pieces. On one, a robustly woven Coptic linen tunic of the sixth century, squares of shadowy dancing figures in deep blue and gold, the color of wheat, are surprisingly refined in detailing. On the other, a painted linen fragment almost seven inches square, stitched by a master needleworker in the Ptolomaic period between 323 and 30 B.C., is dominated by an aristocratic-looking appliqued baboon depicting the god Hapy, probably part of a coffin decoration. Mr. Apraxine was born in Estonia and educated in Belgium, where he served as an adviser in the 1960's for Baron Leon Lambert's collection of modern and primitive art. After Mr. Apraxine came to New York in 1970, he was an assistant curator of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art for several years, and in 1975 became the curator at Gilman of its photography collection. ''Home was nowhere and I lived like a nomad - everything I owned could go into a suitcase,'' he recalled. That explains part of the attraction of weavings. ''These textiles were portable gardens,'' he said. Once he became more deeply involved in collecting, however, he realized that there was more to handling textiles than folding them or rolling them up so that they can be transported easily. To display and store fabrics poses problems, he said, noting that the ideal environment for most textiles is dust-free, dry and away from natural light. Gail Martin, one of the gallery's three partners, said that the collection is being sold as a unit for an undisclosed price that is ''well into six figures'' She pointed out that virtually all of the collection was purchased by Mr. Apraxine at the gallery or with the advice of herself and her partners, Ocsi Ullmann and Vladimir Haustov. Other selections offered at this 15-year-old gallery range from about $3,000 to $100,000, and include archeological and ethnic works that have come from most of the same periods and places as can be seen in Mr. Apraxine's collection. ANTIQUES
