846|1987\01\04|JETS ELIMINATED BY BROWNS IN OVERTIME|The season finally ran out on the Jets today, but it took the third-longest game in pro football history and a magnificent Browns comeback to close it.|The season finally ran out on the Jets today, but it took the third-longest game in pro football history and a magnificent Browns comeback to close it. The season finally ran out on the Jets today, but it took the third-longest game in pro football history and a magnificent Browns comeback to close it. At the end, it came down to Mark Moseley, the erratic, 38-year-old kicker closing out his 15th season. After missing a 23-yard boot earlier in sudden-death play, he kicked the winner, a 27-yarder toward Lake Erie. That shot gave the Browns a 23-20 victory after 17 minutes 2 seconds of overtime and sent them into the American Conference championship game here next Sunday. The Browns (13-4) will play the winner of the divisional playoff game between the Broncos and the New England Patriots Sunday in Denver. The Jets held a 20-10 lead with a little more than four minutes remaining in regulation despite an injury to Pat Ryan, their starting quarterback. O'Brien Replaces Ryan Ryan, who replaced Ken O'Brien as the starter in the wild-card playoff victory over the Kansas City Chiefs last week, reinjured a groin pull he had suffered during today's warm-ups. So O'Brien relieved him in the second quarter, with the Jets trailing by 10-7. Though the Jets opened a 10-point lead in the fourth quarter, neither quarterback was able to generate much offense. The Jets managed only 2 third-down conversions in 18 attempts, and 9 sacks by the Browns equaled a playoff record. O'Brien had been at the helm in the Jets' five straight season-ending losses, when their record plummeted to 10-6. Yet, the Jet defense, despite giving up a playoff record of 558 net yards, kept the Browns from catching up until the final minutes of the fourth quarter. That's when Bernie Kosar, with only one timeout remaining, led a pair of scoring drives. One went for a touchdown (helped by a key roughing-the-passer call against Mark Gastineau), and the other ended with Moseley's tying field goal with only 7 seconds remaining. Records for Kosar On his longest day, Kosar equaled a playoff record with 33 pass completions and set post-season records for passing with 64 attempts and 489 yards. It was Cleveland's first playoff victory since 1969, and the first playoff victory for a Central Division champion after one-game elmininations the previous three years. This Browns team, though, knows how to hang in. To Coach Marty Schottenheimer of the Browns, it was ''the opportunity to experience one of the finest games in the history of this sport.'' But it was something less to Coach Joe Walton of the Jets, who said, ''It's a very empty feeling.'' Overtime in the playoffs does not end after a 15-minute quarter, as it does in the regular season when tie games are possible. So after 15 scoreless minutes today, the teams went into a second overtime, which ended after 2:02 on Moseley's kick. The only longer games were in the 1971 playoffs when the Dolphins defeated the Chiefs 22:40 into overtime and a 1962 American Football League playoff game in which the Dallas Texans beat the Oilers 17:54 into overtime. Moseley prevented this one from going any longer, even though he had missed three of his first five field-goal attempts today. ''It's phenomenal the opportunity I've had to win games over the years,'' said Moseley, who earlier this season was cut by the Redskins in his 12th year with the team. Despite the constant din produced by 78,106 fans at Cleveland Stadium, this was often a dull game. And the Jets were seemingly in control with only 4:14 left while holding a commanding 10-point edge thanks to a 25-yard Freeman McNeil run. The score had been positioned by Jerry Holmes's interception. That was the second straight Browns drive that had ended with an interception. Earlier in the fourth quarter, Russell Carter became the first player to intercept Kosar after 133 straight passes. Kosar had not been intercepted the final three games of the regular season. With McNeil's score, the Browns seemed finished. Kosar had a first and 20 after a penalty and was sacked by Marty Lyons. With second and 24, Kosar threw an incomplete pass, but Gastineau was called for a late hit. It kept alive the drive, on which Kosar completed 6 of 9 passes. ''I've hit quarterbacks later than that and wasn't called,'' Gastineau said later. But Kevin Mack completed that drive with a 1-yard touchdown run and with 1:57 remaining the Browns trailed by 3. But McNeil was unable to run at peak performance at this point. On the previous drive he was poked in the eye, and this time the Jets held the ball for less than a minute. One of Dave Jennings's playoff-record 14 punts allowed the Browns to start from their 33. A penalty to Carl Howard, the Jets' cornerback, and a 37-yard completion to Webster Slaughter brought the Browns to the Jets' 15, from where Moseley sent the game into overtime with a 22-yard field goal with only seven seconds showing on the clock. In the overtime, three Jet drives failed and O'Brien was sacked twice. Over all, he was dumped six times and Ryan three times. The Jets won the toss, received the kick and were forced to punt. But on the Browns' first possession, they got to the Jets' 5-yard line. On first down, Schottenheimer didn't hesitate: He called on Moseley. But the kick was wide to the right. The Browns started the winning drive on their 31. After the first 15-minute overtime period had expired, the teams changed sides, and the Browns started to run the ball with Mack. A Tired Defense Bud Carson, the Jets' defensive coordinator, said his pass-rushers were simply too tired at that point and that he had to use lighter defensive backs to protect against Kosar's passes. So when Kosar handed Mack the ball, he was often running against smaller players. The Browns ground it out, including runs of 4 yards by Mack, 8 yards by Mack, then Herman Fontenot for 7, Mack for 15, then 4, then 7 more. At the Jets' 9, on second down, Schottenheimer again called for Moseley. This one was true. The end came 4 hours 5 minutes after the opening kickoff. The Jets' highlight had occurred hours earlier, when Ryan handed off to McNeil, who ran a few steps to the right, then lateraled back to Ryan, who found Wesley Walker in the end zone. That 42-yard score put the Jets on top, 7-0, but it did not diminish the Browns' enthusiasm. They immediately produced a 98-yard march that ended with Fontenot snaring a 37-yard touchdown pass from Kosar. Moseley and Pat Leahy traded second-quarter field goals, but Leahy kicked a 37-yarder to put the Jets ahead by 13-10 in the third quarter. But when McNeil put the Jets ahead by 20-10 in the fourth period, very few people deserted the cavernous, old stadium. MCnEIL HELD IN CHECK McNeil averaged only 2.8 yards a carry despite his 25-yard touchdown run, as 25 carries gained 71 yards. . . . Ryan was able to hold for Leahy on field-goal attempts even though he was unable to pass. Neither Ryan nor O'Brien threw an interception, and the Jets did not turn over the ball. . . . The Jets' secondary, meanwhile, was hampered by some new pass routes the Browns employed. Kosar's favorite receiver was the veteran tight end Ozzie Newsome, who caught 6 passes for 114 yards. Ten Cleveland receivers caught passes.
