848|1987\01\04|MONTANA USES MAGICAL TOUCH TO INSPIRE 49ERS TO NEW HIEGHTS|WHAT do you suppose his next trick might be, escaping from a straitjacket inside a locked truck falling to the floor of San Francisco Bay? Walking across the bay?|WHAT do you suppose his next trick might be, escaping from a straitjacket inside a locked truck falling to the floor of San Francisco Bay? Walking across the bay? WHAT do you suppose his next trick might be, escaping from a straitjacket inside a locked truck falling to the floor of San Francisco Bay? Walking across the bay? Or maybe it will be something more mundane, like leading the San Francisco 49ers to a victory over the Giants today in their National Conference divisional playoff game. With everything else he has done, that would be routine. This is no ordinary Joe, don't forget. This is football's Man of the Year, medical division. Or maybe that should be miracle division. How many other players have returned to play seven weeks after back surgery? If the answer is as many as two, then ask yourself: How many defied his surgeon's warning that he would be ''crazy'' to resume his career, returned anyway and led his team to a division title with five victories in the last seven games? Only one guy did that, of course: Joe Montana. The miracle thing is tough to prove. Maybe it's even a little presumptuous. Still, it's almost spooky what happened this season in the eight games he has played - one before the operation and the last seven - as opposed to the eight in which his backups, Jeff Kemp and Mike Moroski, started. Besides winning more often with Montana, the 49ers scored more points, made more first downs, completed passes at a higher percentage, fumbled less, controlled the ball longer, allowed fewer points and intercepted more passes. Even Ray Wersching kicked his field-goal attempts more accurately in games Montana played. Not only that, opposing kickers were less accurate. Spooky. ''I know what you mean,'' said Keith Fahnhorst, the right tackle. You could almost hear the ''Twilight Zone'' theme song. ''Certain players make other players play at a higher level just by their presence. But I can't explain it better than that.'' ''He has an aura about him,'' said Mike Holmgren, the 49ers' quarterbacks coach. ''He seems to be one of those larger-than-life guys. When I go home, my little girls don't say, 'Hi, Daddy, how are you?' The first thing they want to know is, 'How's Joe?' My wife wants to know, too.'' Just for the record, Montana's not buying it. The mere suggestion that he's any different from his 44 teammates makes him shake his head and laugh. ''Not me,'' he said the other day. ''We just started to play well toward the end of the year; I don't know what it was.'' He would sooner have you believe he's a regular Joe, no one special, just one of the guys, and off the field maybe he is. Shy and retiring, he seldom seeks the spotlight that inevitably finds him. Not that he's rude under its glare. To the contrary. He's polite, respectful, engaging, sometimes funny, but always self-effacing and modest. And now, perhaps a little more so. The operation shook him. ''I was scared to death,'' he said. He had good reason to be afraid. A team of doctors cut open his lower back to repair a herniated disk, after which there was speculation he might never play again. Even after his intensive rehabilitation, the chief surgeon who cleared him to return to the team, Dr. Arthur White of San Francisco, nonetheless offered his personal opinion that anyone who had the operation Montana had would be ''crazy'' to play football again. Undaunted, Montana returned in the 10th week of the season and completed 13 of 19 passes, 3 of them for touchdowns, in a 43-17 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals. More important, he finished the game in one piece and with no pain. He went on the lead the 49ers to the N.F.C. Western Division title with a masterly performance in the final game of the season, a 24-14 victory over the Los Angeles Rams in which he did a little surgery of his own, carving up the Rams with 23 completions for 238 yards and two touchdowns. His line for 8 games: 307 passes, 191 completed (62.2 percent) for 2,236 yards, 8 touchdowns and 8 interceptions. Double everything, and it would have been his career high for attempts, completions, yards and interceptions. Not touchdowns. Looking back, Montana does not give himself a rave review for the season. ''When I came back,'' he said, ''it felt like I had sat out a year. Sometimes I thought I played well. Sometimes I didn't. I was disappointed that I wasn't quite as sharp as I had been. I missed a few easy throws; some were too easy. And I misread a few plays.'' It's that kind of assessment that endears Montana to many of those around him. Holmgren, who joined Bill Walsh's staff only this year, noted that Montana is ''one of the hardest-working guys'' he had ever seen. To those who know him longer, that's old news. In the six seasons Montana has been the fulltime starter, he has helped the 49ers win more than 70 percent of their games, and that includes victories in two of the last five Super Bowls. But it's more than Super Bowl victories, more than a great touchdown pass to Dwight Clark in the final moments of a conference championship game, more than the daring rollouts and all those completions that contribute to the sense of wonder some perceive in him. It's also the confidence he exudes, his quiet leadership. ''He just knows how to handle himself,'' said Fahnhorst. ''He comes up with a play when you need it. You know you're always in a game with Joe Montana.'' Wersching touched on it the other day. In an interview with The San Francisco Chronicle, he said: ''It's what Joe creates when he's on the field, when he's on your side. It's that he has a charisma about him. He doesn't say anything. He lets his leadership role on the field express everything. With that, everybody else relaxes.'' Including the kicker, apparently. In games Montana played, Wersching was good on 14 of 17 field-goal attempts. In the other 8, he was good on 11 of 18. Well, not all the 49ers are sold on the mystical approach. Even Fahnhorst recognized the dangers of abundant reliance on Montana. ''It's not like everbody waits around for him to do it,'' Fahnhorst said. ''That doesn't happen.'' And it shouldn't, according to Russ Francis, the tight end. ''It would be a mistake,'' he said, ''to try to manufacture a Joe Montana, a floating apparition over football, so that when anybody needs things to go right he would come to life and the magic would happen.'' In fact, he added, there is no magic involved at all: ''He can pick a defense apart by finding the third receiver in sequence. That's just knowing how to read the defense. It's not magic, and it's very tangible.'' Last year the Giants beat the 49ers, 17-3, in the N.F.C. wild-card game. Montana was beat up going in, with a sore shoulder, sore ribs, ''a little bit of everything,'' he said. This time, he faces the Giants intact. No aches. No pains. And having endured 10 sacks and numerous hits over the last seven weeks of the season, he is only reminded of his back surgery when someone asks about it. ''I feel pretty good,'' he says softly. Maybe good enough to make the Giants disappear.
