849|1987\01\04|REDSKINS DETHRONE BEARS|The Chicago Bears' season of success and turmoil came to a stunning end today, as the defending National Football League champions were beaten by the Washington Redskins in the divisional round of the playoffs.|The Chicago Bears' season of success and turmoil came to a stunning end today, as the defending National Football League champions were beaten by the Washington Redskins in the divisional round of the playoffs. The Chicago Bears' season of success and turmoil came to a stunning end today, as the defending National Football League champions were beaten by the Washington Redskins in the divisional round of the playoffs. The 27-13 loss, shocking in light of the Bears' 14-2 regular season but not in light of their succession of quarterbacks, assures that for the seventh year in a row no team will win consecutive Super Bowls. As victors, the Redskins, who were 12-4 in the regular season and 19-7 winners over the Los Angeles Rams in the National Conference wild-card game last Sunday, will play the winner of Sunday's game between the Giants or the San Francisco 49ers - in either case, on the home field of the winner. ''I guess maybe my dreams didn't come true this year,'' Mike Ditka, the Bears' coach, said after reiterating some of the difficulties the Bears had today. They included two interceptions and two fumbles and a less than Bear-like defense. ''It's a big disappointment to us,'' Ditka added. ''We've been plagued by turnovers all year. Today, we had some critical ones at the wrong time.'' The Redskins' victory was marked by the brilliant play of Jay Schroeder, who twice turned Bears blitzes into touchdowns; the solid second-half running of George Rogers, and the relentless play of the Washington defense, especially against the run. Schroeder, who completed 15 of 32 passes for 184 yards, was able to neutralize the Bears' famed pass rush with shorter drops, rollouts, quicker releases and, on the two touchdown passes, by finding the receiver - in both cases Art Monk - in single coverage. A 28-yard scoring pass to Monk in the first quarter gave the Redskins a 7-0 lead. A 23-yarder to him in the third quarter put them into the lead for good, 14-13. The Redskins' other scores came on a 1-yard plunge by Rogers - just the fifth rushing touchdown the Bears yielded all season - and two field goals by Jess Atkinson, the former Giant who joined the Redskins before the last game of the regular season. Pass Defenses Thwarted ''Going in, we felt the big thing was the pass blocking,'' said Schroeder, who was sacked just once. ''I knew if we could get single coverage, they couldn't cover us.'' The protection was all the more impressive in that two starting offensive linemen, Russ Grimm, a guard, and Joe Jacoby, a tackle, played with bothersome injuries from the Rams game. Grimm had a severely bruised rib cage; Jacoby a broken right hand. The Redskins' defense, which played erratically over the season, had one of its best games, not only causing the turnovers but also befuddling Flutie with a good mix of man-to-man and zone coverage. ''We had a great opportunity to go out there and do something, and I felt comfortable,'' said Flutie, who joined the Bears in midseason. ''The fact that I hadn't been here long had no effect on what happened. Things just weren't clicking.'' Payton Is Shut Down Flutie's moment of triumph was a 50-yard pass to Willie Gault that tied the score, 7-7, in the second period. By the end, he had completed just 11 of 31 passes for 134 yards. Yet it was hardly just Flutie who caused the downfall of the champions. Walter Payton, the Bears' outstanding running back, was held to 38 yards on 14 carries. He also lost the ball on a third-quarter fumble at the Washington 17-yard line, when the Bears were trailing, 14-13. The Redskins then drove 83 yards for their third touchdown. If one play symbolized the frustrations of a season of change at quarterback (Jim McMahon, Mike Tomczak, Steve Fuller and Flutie) and periodic bickering between the players and Ditka, it was Payton's fumble. The Defense Was Solid To that point, the Bears had done a reasonably solid job with their defense, despite the two touchdowns they had allowed. But give Schroeder credit for that. On the first, he watched Gary Fencik, the free safety, burst through the middle, leaving Monk only to beat Mike Richard. On the second, he caught Dave Duerson, the strong safety, and Wilber Marshall, the outside linebacker, leaving Monk again to beat only Richardson. But on the next kickoff, Dennis Gentry ran the ball back 48 yards, giving the Bears a first down at the Washington 42. Neal Anderson ran for 11 yards. Calvin Thomas cut through the left side for 13 more. On the next play, Flutie handed off to Payton, who hit the left side. Darryl Grant, the Redskins' right tackle, knocked the ball loose and Monte Coleman recovered. On the Redskins' next drive, on a first down at the Chicago 18, Richardson was called for interfering with Monk in the end zone. That gave the Redskins a first down at the 1. Two plays later, Rogers scored.
