85|1987\01\01|IRAN ACCUSES U.S. IN TALKS, SAYING ASSET DEAL WAS NEAR|Iran's chief negotiator accused the United States today of not dealing in ''good faith'' in talks on returning $507.7 million in blocked Iranian assets.|Iran's chief negotiator accused the United States today of not dealing in ''good faith'' in talks on returning $507.7 million in blocked Iranian assets. Iran's chief negotiator accused the United States today of not dealing in ''good faith'' in talks on returning $507.7 million in blocked Iranian assets. The talks were adjourned earlier today, despite an Iranian assertion that a settlement was near. The meeting at the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal lasted only 30 minutes, and the United States said this fourth round of talks was at an end. Both sides confirmed, however, that further meetings are planned. Returning to United States At the State Department in Washington, Phyllis Oakley, a spokesman, said, ''The United States negotiators are returning to the United States to consult in preparation for the next meeting. We feel progress was made.'' Mrs. Oakley said no agreement had been expected today and holding more sessions had been seen as ''a likely outcome,'' although she said no date for resumption was set. Assadollah Nouri, the chief Iranian negotiator, said the United States side at The Hague told him no agreement could be reached now because Washington officials were not available over the holiday. He said Iran had expected to conclude the discussions today. At Federal Reserve Bank The $507.7 million represents what is left over, plus interest, in Account No. 1 at the New York Federal Reserve Bank, a $3.66 billion account established with Iranian money in 1981 to pay off syndicated bank loans. The United States delegation ''was supposed to put its final draft for implementation of the award on the table so that we might be able to conclude our negotiations,'' Mr. Nouri said. ''But without any justification, the United States delegation said to us today that it would not be ready to continue the talks,'' he added. Mr. Nouri continued, ''They said that their home authorities are not available at this time of the year in Washington so they could not reach them easily to persuade them to sign a final draft.'' Lack of Faith Charged ''The Government of the United States in implementing the tribunal award has so far not shown its good faith,'' the Iranian negotiator charged. No spokesman was available at the American Embassy to respond to Mr. Nouri's comments. Last August, the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal ordered return of Account No. 1 funds to Iran. The United States has agreed in principle to the payback. The release of all Iranian assets blocked in the United States, including military equipment, has recently been linked by the Iranian Parliament Speaker, Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, to possible Iranian intercession on behalf of American hostages in Lebanon. Funds and Equipment Iran needs both funds and equipment to pursue its six-year-old war with Iraq. Today, however, Prime Minister Mir Hussein Moussavi was quoted by the official Islamic Republic News Agency as denying any link between the money and the hostages. The report was monitored in Nicosia, Cyprus.
