854|1987\01\04|EAST COAST IS RELIEVED AT LIGHT STORM DAMAGE|Communities along the Northeast coast began to recover yesterday from a powerful winter storm and rare high tides that flooded residential streets from the Carolinas to Maine and left at least 19 people dead.|Communities along the Northeast coast began to recover yesterday from a powerful winter storm and rare high tides that flooded residential streets from the Carolinas to Maine and left at least 19 people dead. Communities along the Northeast coast began to recover yesterday from a powerful winter storm and rare high tides that flooded residential streets from the Carolinas to Maine and left at least 19 people dead. On the shores of Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Maine, residents anxiously watched the rise of the afternoon tide. But in most cities and towns along the Atlantic Seaboard, officials expressed relief that gray Atlantic waters had receded after lapping at the edge of neighborhoods. The storm blanketed inland areas with up to two feet of snow. ''We were fortunate that the worst didn't come true,'' said a spokesman for the National Weather Service in Boston, Charles Foley, who followed the storm that pummeled the South on New Year's Day as it blew north along the coasts of Maine and Nova Scotia yesterday. Winds of up to 70 miles an hour gusted out to sea, Mr. Foley said, and fought off rising tides that could have destroyed many more homes. The storm dumped up to two feet of snow on most towns in central Massachusetts yesterday, the National Weather Service said, and sent tides up to five feet higher than normal at noon. A powerful northeaster that buffeted the East Coast and an unusual configuration of the Sun, Moon and Earth that pulled tides to exceptional heights together caused serious flooding, and forced evacuations in the southern and mid-Atlantic states earlier in the week. $16 Million Damage Toll By yesterday morning, however, power failures and flooded roadways that dotted eastern Massachusetts were under control, officials said. Despite some continuing flooding, they said, most of the 350 residents who had been evacuated from coastline towns south of Boston had returned home. The storm caused $16 million in damage in the Carolinas and Virginia on New Year's Day and swept into the Northeast Friday. In the New York Metropolitan region, the storm swamped major roads, washed away a home in the Hamptons and flooded the ground floors of Fire Island houses. On the West Coast, meanwhile, a Pacific Ocean storm pummeled the coasts of Oregon and Northern California with high winds and waves. In Oregon, gusts of more than 80 miles per hour hit Cape Blanco and 15- to 20-foot waves came ashore at Depoe Bay. Winter snow warnings went into effect in mountainous regions of northern California and Oregon, where up to 18 inches of snow were predicted. Snow continued to fall in New England and northern New York State well into the day, keeping many rural roads closed. In the town of Marcellus, N.Y., outside of Syracuse, the State Police said a Trailways bus carrying a group of skiers from Philadelphia overturned on a slippery road and was struck by two other vehicles early yesterday, killing a woman passenger and injuring the other 46 bus passengers. None of the injuries appeared to be life-threatening, the police said. Snow-covered roads were also blamed for two deaths in Vermont, one in New Jersey, one in Connecticut and another in Massachusetts. But as the sun poked through clouds in the New York Metropolitan region in the early afternoon, the police on Long Island and New Jersey said that despite seas that made many beaches disappear, there were few reports of serious damage to property. Little Damage in Atlantic City ''There has really been very little damage,'' said a police official in Atlantic City, the gambling resort on an island where roads were closed Friday. In Maine, the storm dumped 10 to 24 inches of snow across the state, one of the heaviest snowfalls in a decade. Portland recorded a tide of 13.1 feet Friday, the third-highest since 1913. In Massachusetts, the coastal town of Marshfield suffered the worst damage from the storm, officials said, when the tides breached a protective sea wall Friday and severely eroded some beaches. At the height of the storm, at noon Friday, the National Guard brought boats to rescue the 50 to 60 people clinging to the roofs of their flooded houses, said an officer of the State Civil Defense Agency, Jerry Meister. Throughout yesterday, police officers, civil defense officials and National Guardsmen monitored the winds and rising waters around Marshfield while people in town feverishly worked at rebuilding the damaged sea wall in time for the 2 P.M. high tide. Nonetheless, the atmosphere in town was at times less one of an emergency than of a rare weekend spectacle. ''Our main problems were the curiosity seekers who were watching the storm from the shore with the water pouring over their cars.'' said a Marshfield police spokesman, Barbara Skrycki, who said the town had no reports of fires, downed trees or medical problems. Some of the hundreds of people had refused to evacuate their homes and had watched the waters rise around their houses. ''I'm from the old school, I don't get excited,'' said Dick Farley, 42 years old, who remained at home throughout the storm. ''As a matter of fact, my mother is on the front porch right now feeding the ducks.'' And in the coastal town of Rye, N.H., while most people were digging out from more than a foot of snow, Bob Pletschke and Jim Soroka, two avid surfers from Conway, N.H., decided to take advantage of the unusual high tides by putting on their wetsuits and hitting the beach. They joined a handful of other surfers who paddled 200 yards off shore to ride what turned out to be only modest waves. ''In the White mountains where I live, everybody is skiing today,'' Mr. Pletschke said. ''I like it better this way. It's not so crowded.''
