859|1987\01\04|NEWS SUMMARY SUNDAY, JANUARY 4, 1987|International#3-17 A Brazilian jetliner crashed and disintegrated in a forest outside Abidjan, Ivory Coast, and 49 of the 51 people aboard were presumed dead. Soon after takeoff, the pilot reported an engine on fire. Page 1 A Cuban-American's role in supplying weapons to Nicaraguan rebels was described in his first public statement on the subject.|International#3-17 A Brazilian jetliner crashed and disintegrated in a forest outside Abidjan, Ivory Coast, and 49 of the 51 people aboard were presumed dead. Soon after takeoff, the pilot reported an engine on fire. Page 1 A Cuban-American's role in supplying weapons to Nicaraguan rebels was described in his first public statement on the subject. International#3-17 A Brazilian jetliner crashed and disintegrated in a forest outside Abidjan, Ivory Coast, and 49 of the 51 people aboard were presumed dead. Soon after takeoff, the pilot reported an engine on fire. Page 1 A Cuban-American's role in supplying weapons to Nicaraguan rebels was described in his first public statement on the subject. The man, Felix Rodriguez, said he was ''marginally involved.'' #8 Military analysis: Central America is in for more violence in 1987, say Government and military officials, who expect a sharp upturn in fighting between the Nicaraguan rebels and Sandinista forces. #7 Self-government for Mexico City has recently become a focus for the Mexican opposition. A coalition of four leftist parties and Mexico's one rightist party is leading the campaign. #6 A bomb exploded in Johannesburg, and the police said a black woman was seriously wounded and two other people were slightly hurt. The explosion was the first in the city center for several months. #3 A recent wave of violence in India seen in protests over regional, religious and linguistic grievances has underscored the fact that national integration remains difficult. #14 Six New Delhi shelters offer warmth to many poor people and an alternative to sleeping outside. More than 100 people are reported to have died in a cold spell sweeping the plains of northern India. #15 The West's effect on Singapore may be cause for concern, says its Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, who was educated in Britain. He worries that the country is losing its Asian cultural bearings. #16 Chad said Libya dropped napalm from aircraft on two northern towns that were retaken from the Libyans this week and that Libyan ground forces had begun an attack on one of them. Libya's official press denied the accusations of air attacks. #10 AIDS spreads in Edinburgh 8 Africa of two minds on AIDS 9 Cyprus says Israel turned back 2 Lebanese ferries 12 National#18-23 San Juan police received a warning that the Dupont Plaza Hotel faced a bomb threat an hour and a half before the explosion and fire that took 95 lives on New Year's Eve, the police said, but so far no physical evidence of a bomb had been found. #1 To identify the 95 charred bodies from the fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel, a team of more than 40 pathologists has worked constantly, relying on information like dental records and descriptions of jewelry. #1 A helicopter pilot was a hero. In the first minutes of the San Juan fire, Pat Walter, a 41-year-old pilot, initiated a daring rooftop rescue of trapped guests until larger Navy helicopters arrived. #22 Spending cuts for many agencies, but an increase for NASA, are envisioned in President Reagan's new budget. Documents show reductions for the Departments of Education, Agriculture, Commerce, Energy, Interior and Transportation. #1 The President faces surgery, a colonoscopy today and prostate surgery tomorrow. Experts say his chances of coming through the two grueling procedures with no major difficulty are good. #1 A U.S. study of Japanese education has linked Japan's economic success to the rigorous efficiency of its primary and secondary schools. The study sought to draw lessons from what it described as a ''learning society.'' #1 Tokyo looks at U.S. schools 10 The Constitution's bicentennial celebration began in Philadelphia with fireworks on New Year's Eve, touching off what promises to be a yearlong, thoughtful examination of the American political system. #1 The West's worst winter drought in a decade is keeping skiers off the slopes, particularly in California and Utah. Resort operators say they have already lost millions of dollars because of reduced business. #18 Boston is cleaning up its harbor. It is so polluted that the effort will cost $2 billion and last at least until 2000. A healthy and clean Boston harbor is something no one now living has ever seen. #32 Washington Talk#36 Q. and A.: Bradford Reynolds Regional#24-27 A victim said the police had disputed portions of his story about the Howard Beach attack, had treated him more like a criminal than a victim and had conducted a ''masquerade investigation.'' #24 Issues facing the Jersey Legislature this year will likely be affected by the November elections. Many issues are on the agenda, including insurance costs, shore and wetlands protection, transportation financing and municipal aid. #25 The man accused of stabbing a 70-year-old Chinese performer at a charity benefit was described by employees of a mission where he lived as a ''quiet man'' who had never shown ''a violent nature.'' #25 Inadequate child-care services were noted by a state commission that said services do not meet the needs of youngsters requiring supervision and are more expensive than poor parents can afford. #25
