861|1987\01\04|AN EASY NIGHT FOR THE NETS|The Los Angeles Clippers may be heading for the National Basketball Association record books, but it would not be a source of pride.|The Los Angeles Clippers may be heading for the National Basketball Association record books, but it would not be a source of pride. The Los Angeles Clippers may be heading for the National Basketball Association record books, but it would not be a source of pride. Their overwhelming 118-97 loss to the Nets tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena was the Clippers' 11th in a row and their 23d in the last 24 games. If the Clippers, now 4-26, continue losing at their current pace, they will threaten the Philadelphia 76ers' 9-73 finish during the 1972-73 season, the worst in league history. ''It was basically an easy victory for us,'' said Mike Gminski, the Nets' center, who turned in a 17-point, 10-rebound performance. ''We need games like that.'' The Nets piled up a 20-2 lead in the opening four and a half minutes of the game. While Gminski was scoring 7 points and Buck Williams 5 of his 15, the Clippers' only score in their first nine attempts was a turnaround jumper 1 minute 29 seconds into the game by Benoit Benjamin, their 7-foot second-year center. ''They were not getting back on defense,'' said Gminski. ''When a team falls behind by 10 points or so so early like they did tonight, teams tend to panic. They began to take wild shots and when they miss and we controlled the boards, the lead just began to snowball.'' The victory, the Nets' easiest of the season, made their record 9-21. In losing their 11th straight game to a team with a sub-.500 record, the Clippers never recuperated from that disastrous start. The Nets led by 32-20 at the quarter and 59-42 at halftime. The Clippers, who own the worst shooting percentage in the league (.455), shot 35 percent in the game. Meanwhile, the Nets, led by Tony Brown's 22 points, shot 52 percent from the field and outrebounded the Clippers, 69-38. Don Chaney, the Clippers' coach, calling the performance ''the worst of the season,'' said he saw little help and few victories in the future. ''It's going to be difficult for us to win 10 games,'' said Chaney. Although the Clippers started the season without Norm Nixon, the playmaker who suffered a torn tendon in his left knee in an offseason softball game in Central Park, they were once 3-3. But their problems began to mount in the ninth game of the season against the Dallas Mavericks when Marques Johnson, their leading scorer, was lost for the season when he suffered a serious back injury in a collision with Benjamin. Mike Woodson, the former Knick who had a 2-for-15 shooting night, called it ''a frustrating night that put an end to a frustrating day.'' ''It took us almost 10 hours to get here from Indianapolis,'' said Woodson, alluding to mechanical problems on the team's flight. PRO BASKETBALL
