862|1987\01\04|SIGNS OF OLD KNICKS SURFACE IN DEFEAT|Throughout their recent resurgence, it became difficult to recall just how atrocious the Knicks once were. The times when their lack of talent and inability to mesh as a team usually resulted in embarrassing, lopsided defeats were almost forgotten.|Throughout their recent resurgence, it became difficult to recall just how atrocious the Knicks once were. The times when their lack of talent and inability to mesh as a team usually resulted in embarrassing, lopsided defeats were almost forgotten. Throughout their recent resurgence, it became difficult to recall just how atrocious the Knicks once were. The times when their lack of talent and inability to mesh as a team usually resulted in embarrassing, lopsided defeats were almost forgotten. Tonight, however, the Knicks provided a grim reminder of those times. ''It seemed like we went back to our old selves,'' said Gerald Wilkins. And it wasn't a pleasant return. The Knicks' 114-92 thrashing tonight at the hands of the young, surging Hawks was not their worst defeat of the season. But it was among the most surprising because it came at a time when they were playing their best basketball of the season. That, and the resulting four-game winning streak, ended with a careless and unenthusiastic exhibition. The Knicks committed a season-high 26 turnovers, played ineffectively at both ends of the court and trailed by as many as 30 points en route to their 22d defeat in 31 games. The Knicks road record fell to 2-15. The Hawks raised their record to 22-7, best in the Eastern Conference. It was an evening when there was little to praise. Patrick Ewing opened the contest with 12 first-period points, but finished with only 16, and Wilkins provided the sellout crowd of 16,522 fans with the only excitement by the opposition with 20 points. But Bill Cartwright (1 for 6 from the floor, 9 points and a season-high 7 turnovers), Gerald Henderson (4 for 11), Pat Cummings (5 fouls in 5 minutes) all suffered what were among their worst performances of the season. Conversely, pratically any player the Hawks' coach, Mike Fratello, summoned onto the court contributed to the rout. All 12 Atlanta players scored, and eight managed double-figures. Dominique Wilkins led the Hawks scorers with 21 points, 15 in the first period. ''I don't think there was anything we could have done,'' said Bob Hill, the Knicks coach. ''It was just one of those nights.'' It was indeed a night when the challenge was lost soon after it had begun. The Hawks, with weapons as varied and potent as any team, opened the assault with Wilkins. Last year's scoring champion started with a soft-jumper from the baseline. Then he drew a foul on a drive, and followed with a 3-pointer that touched nothing but net. By the end of the first period, Wilkins had 15 points and the Hawks led by 37-26. ''Dominique really ignites their team,'' said Trent Tucker. ''You can see that when he does something explosive on the offensive end, the whole team gets a lift.'' Eight different Hawks scored in the second period, and from everywhere on the floor. Little-known and little-used players such as Antoine Carr (8 points) and John Battle (10 points) took advantage of the widening scoring gap to pad their statistics, while starters such as Randy Wittman (15 points), Glenn Rivers (10 points) and Wayne Rollins (10 points 16 rebounds) managed their share. ''Every guy that came off the bench was scoring points and we just couldn't get going,'' said Gerald Wilkins. ''They were running down our throats.'' The most discouraging news is that the Knicks face the Hawks again on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden. ''I told them to keep their chins up,'' Hill said of his post-game talk. ''We'll make some adjustments and see what happens.''  PRO BASKETBALL
