863|1987\01\04|SLUMP OF ISLANDERS IS WORST IN 3 YEARS|The Bruins, like the Flyers, are a team considered as formidable a unit on the road as at home, and their 31-17-9 lead in their series against the Islanders - including a 15-12-1 edge at Nassau Coliseum - supports that theory.|The Bruins, like the Flyers, are a team considered as formidable a unit on the road as at home, and their 31-17-9 lead in their series against the Islanders - including a 15-12-1 edge at Nassau Coliseum - supports that theory. The Bruins, like the Flyers, are a team considered as formidable a unit on the road as at home, and their 31-17-9 lead in their series against the Islanders - including a 15-12-1 edge at Nassau Coliseum - supports that theory. They don't bring finesse to the opponent's rink, nor do they rely on speed. Instead, they chug impassively along, squeeze the competition's forays off toward the boards and vary their methods of attack. In the course of beating the Islanders, 5-4, tonight at Nassau Coliseum, they alternately used velocity, with seven hard shots in the first, and frequency, outshooting their hosts by 15-7 in the second, and ambush, scoring their fourth goal 25 seconds into the final period. Then, after third-period goals from Mike Bossy and Brent Sutter in the space of a giddy 35 seconds made the score 4-4, the Bruins spoiled the comeback with a power-play goal from Tom McCarthy at 13:42. ''We really wanted to win this one rather than blow it,'' said Denis Potvin, who was called for the interference penalty that preceded McCarthy's goal. ''I totally killed our momentum when I got that penalty.'' On a night the Islanders had dedicated to breaking out of a slump that had them 0-3-1 in the four games before tonight's, they played their way into their longest drought without a victory since January 1984. ''We played just well enough to lose this,'' said Coach Terry Simpson. In the first period, the Islanders, who had chided themselves for sluggish starts in their last six games, struck quickly. After only 26 seconds, Bryan Trottier's wrist shot bounced sideways off Doug Keans's pads, and Trottier poked his rebound inside the right post. The Bruins blasted their way to a 1-1 tie on their third shot, courtesy of Ray Bourque's power-play slapshot at 8:54. Bossy, whose sore back has curtailed his production, snapped a shot by Keans at 1:24 of the second period. But with the Bruins applying some clever strategy on the power play two minutes later, Charlie Simmer sneaked in behind Kelly Hrudey and put Rick Middleton's pass into the open net at 3:40. The 2-2 tie was broken when Makela, under pressure in his zone, misplayed the puck by sending it onto the stick of Steve Kasper, who scored from deep in the slot at 11:38. The Islanders' two-goal comeback in the third period was flashy but unavailing, as it took the Bruins just over a minute to reassert themselves. Searching for inspired players, the Islanders' general manager, Bill Torrey, and Simpson have lately traveled to watch their minor-league affiliate in Springfield, but they haven't found the caliber of help they need there. HOCKEY
