864|1987\01\04|FROESE STEALS SHOW IN RANGER VICTORY|Just 1 minute 33 seconds into the game, Bobby Carpenter made his first appearance as a Ranger. He skated into the faceoff circle with Peter Stastny and he won the faceoff. Phil Esposito's newest, biggest star was officially in place.|Just 1 minute 33 seconds into the game, Bobby Carpenter made his first appearance as a Ranger. He skated into the faceoff circle with Peter Stastny and he won the faceoff. Phil Esposito's newest, biggest star was officially in place. Just 1 minute 33 seconds into the game, Bobby Carpenter made his first appearance as a Ranger. He skated into the faceoff circle with Peter Stastny and he won the faceoff. Phil Esposito's newest, biggest star was officially in place. That done, another of the new-name Rangers, Bob Froese, stole all the drama. He gave, in short, the most memorable goaltending performance for the Rangers this season. Froese stopped 39 shots and when he was not sliding to his knees to stop a puck, he was taking it in the chin -literally. In the third period, a shot caught him square, he rested for a moment, and then continued slipping and sliding and the Rangers finished off their 5-2 victory over the Quebec Nordiques. ''I can't get over how well he positions himself,'' said Ed Giacomin, a Ranger assistant coach. ''It's clear he's been well taught, and its unbelievable considering he doesn't know his defensemen yet.'' Two Goals for Jensen Chris Jensen scored twice and Don Maloney assisted on all five goals to help bring the Rangers their third straight victory - a first this season - and their fifth in six games. Through a long day of travel and practice, it was all Esposito could do to stop smiling. A few rows behind him on the chartered prop plane that brought the team here this morning Carpenter sat next to Froese. Two weeks ago, neither player was with the team, so they clearly represented the changed face of the Rangers. In less than six months as general manager, Esposito has made several trades that have supplied dividends, he has changed coaches and when he has had a few moments, he has substituted as coach while Tom Webster recovers from ear surgery. When he was asked today what other changes he had contemplated, he said he had thought about coming back to play himself. He is a kidder, but when he said this he was only half-jolking. ''I thought that maybe I could just go out for faceoffs,'' he said. Some would say that it was only a matter of time before it would come to this, that Esposito, 45 years old and six years past his retirement, would try to keep extending his reach. But Esposito has ruminated over this strange thought not because he has lost possession of his ability to think right, nor because he is the ultimate ham. It is merely another sign that there is nothing too far-fetched for Esposito to consider. Tonight, the early attention was on Carpenter, who skated alongside Mark Osborne and Pierre Larouche most of the night. He played in workmanlike fashion, but he had not played since Nov. 22, so he skated in short shifts. ''I played it smart,'' Carpenter said. ''I've got a long way to go before I'll feel completely comfortable.'' So the focus shifted to Froese, who was all show business and surprise -diving, kicking, stubbornly holding off the Nordiques in one of the most brilliant displays in the net that any Ranger goalie has had this season. When the Rangers acquired Froese from Philadelphia, it might have been with the notion that they could use him as fodder for a future trade. But after his first four games for the Rangers with a 3-1 record, that notion has been dismissed. Froese made 14 above-average to improbable saves in the first two periods. He was particularly tough on Brent Ashton, stopping three point-blank shots. And with 7:51 left in the second he made the most memorable of all, a sliding save on a shot from Peter Stastny. In all, he faced 32 shots in the first and second periods while the Rangers had just 14. Still, he had a 3-1 lead after two periods because the Rangers' few shots were usually blistering and they baffled the Nordiques' goalie, Mario Gosselin. ''The amazing thing is I'm not getting tired,'' Froese said. ''Phil has put adrenalin in everyone and it's really helping me.'' And the players who charged up the offense, such as Jensen and Maloney, gave credence to Esposito's theory that he had players to take the place of Mike Ridley and Kelly Miller, whom he traded away for Carpenter. Jensen scored the first goal of the night at 9:17 of the first. Jeff Brown tied it for Quebec at 15:48. In the second period, Larouche scored after 39 seconds and Jensen with a long, high slap shot, scored with 1:35 left in the period. Ron Greschner's goal at 5:07 of the third gave the Rangers a three-goal lead. HOCKEY
