865|1987\01\04|SALUTE TO PENN STATE DEFENSE|A few hours after the last-second climax of his second championship season, one of the proudest moments in a century of football at Penn State, Joe Paterno said he felt weary early on the morning after.|A few hours after the last-second climax of his second championship season, one of the proudest moments in a century of football at Penn State, Joe Paterno said he felt weary early on the morning after. A few hours after the last-second climax of his second championship season, one of the proudest moments in a century of football at Penn State, Joe Paterno said he felt weary early on the morning after. ''A couple of players came into my room at 3 o'clock in the morning looking for a case of beer,'' the coach said. ''We found one for them.'' The night before, the Lions used an ever-changing series of defensive coverages and ball-jarring tackling to distract, frustrate and overcome the previously top-ranked University of Miami and Vinny Testaverde in the Fiesta Bowl. The scoreboard said 14-10. The glaring statistics wondered how. Penn State was outgained, 445 yards to 162, a margin of nearly 3 to 1. Miami held the ball 7 minutes 26 seconds longer and ran 93 offensive plays to Penn State's 59. But more subtle figures reflected some of the methods the resourceful Lions employed to steal a game and earn the No. 1 ranking today in both news-agency polls. ''The things that win big games are not what you do on first and second down,'' Paterno said, ''and they're not necessarily what you do in your own territory.'' John Bruno, the Lion senior, punted nine times for an average of 43.4 yards. Even more significant was the fact that Bruno's work forced Miami to begin inside its 25-yard line six times and never farther than the Hurricane 37. The Lion kickoff coverage restricted Miami to its 25, 15 and 20. Miami converted on 6 of 22 third-down plays, a 27.3 percent rate that was 12.6 below its level throughout the 11 Hurricane victories. When added to seven turnovers, nine penalties and at least six dropped passes, the picture becomes clearer. Testaverde, intercepted nine times all season, was picked off five times Friday night. ''This is the greatest game in Penn State history,'' said Trey Bauer, the seldom understated linebacker who was part of 12 tackles. ''It ranks up there with one or two,'' said John Shaffer, the maligned Lion quarterback who completed just 5 of 16 passes for 53 yards - 232 fewer than Testaverde - but ran for a 4-yard touchdown and made several correct decisions at crucial times. ''We beat them the only way we could beat them,'' Paterno said. ''We beat them in certain situations. We spent hours and hours on playing those situations.'' The problems created by Miami's poor field position were compounded by a defensive scheme developed since late last November. The plan of Jerry Sandusky, the linebacker coach, depended on a consistent three-man rush against a reshaped and healing offensive line; a steady three-man deep zone that defied Miami to throw long and quickly converged to punish the Hurricanes for shorter receptions; a variety of blitzes to make Testaverde think; plus the frequent and surprising insertion of Keith Karpinski, Shane Conlan's replacement, as an extra linebacker. What could give Linebacker U. a chance? What else? More linebackers. The six-week wait that appeared to have eroded the intricate Miami passing game gave the Lions time to create and think. Conlan, who played most of the night with a reinjured left knee that made him walk stiff-legged this morning, was freed for an occasional rush. He sometimes played as a middle linebacker, and other times as a strong safety. His two interceptions doubled his career total. Ray Isom, the 5-foot-9-inch safety whose fierce, fumble-making jolt of Mike Irvin set the pace on Miami's second possession, said there had been 24 coverages. Penn State's success caused the politics surrounding the nation's obsession with No. 1 to be reduced to one play: Pete Giftopoulos's interception at the Penn State 1-yard line to end Miami's frantic 71-yard drive with nine seconds to go. Two days of Penn State practices had been spent on last-minute situations, giving the experienced Lions the presence of mind to make the switches that confounded Miami and took a championship out of the pollsters' hands. Penn State was No. 1 and Miami No. 2 in both The Associated Press poll of sportswriters and broadcasters and the United Press International poll of coaches. The New York Times computer ranking assigned Oklahoma (11-1) the No. 1 position despite the Penn State victory. The .028 difference in the two teams was based primarily on Oklahoma's average margin of victory of 35.8 points, as opposed to Penn State's 17.5. Paterno said he had never seen Sandusky as emotional as his assistant of 18 seasons became Friday night. ''It was disbelief, really, that we did it,'' Sandusky remembered. ''This was just so special because of the people that were involved. Three years ago, they floundered and flopped, and it was the same people that did it all last night. To have a feeling for what it takes, and seeing people believe in that and have the courage and strength to do it, and then have it work, it means so much.''  COLLEGE FOOTBALL
