87|1987\01\01|1,019 SANDINISTA SOLDIERS REPORTED KILLED DURING '86|More than 1,000 Government solders were killed in 1986, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today in a year-end speech.|More than 1,000 Government solders were killed in 1986, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today in a year-end speech. More than 1,000 Government solders were killed in 1986, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today in a year-end speech. Mr. Ortega said Government losses in the war with the rebels totaled 1,019 dead and 1,798 wounded. He estimated that the United States-backed rebels had suffered 6,600 casualties, including 4,000 deaths. The figures were roughly equal to those the Government presented at the close of 1985. Mr. Ortega today portrayed the rebel force as shrinking and ''in the process of decomposition.'' ''The army of 30,000 men that President Reagan dreamed of is at this moment reduced to 6,500 mercenaries,'' the Sandinista leader said in an address broadcast live on Nicaraguan radio stations. ''The millions for the mercenary forces have produced nothing.'' Rebel Chief Dispute Figures American officials have recently estimated that the number of rebels, who are known as contras, is over 10,000. In a telephone interview from Miami, the head of the largest contra group, Adolfo Calero Portocarrero of the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, said figures announced by Sandinista leaders were unreliable. He said that Sandinista casualties were three times higher than announced today and that rebel losses were only a third as great as Mr. Ortega reported. ''We will show in early 1987 that the Sandinistas are vulnerable,'' Mr. Calero said. ''We will bring the war closer to population centers. We will widen and multiply our fronts throughout the country, with the aid that we are getting and more than we will get.' ''In 1987 we expect the downfall of a regime that is corrupt and that is being eaten up from within,'' he said. In an interview 12 months ago, he predicted that 1986 would be ''the year of liberation for Nicaragua.'' Economy Said to Slow Decline President Ortega said today that Nicaragua's economy had reduced its rate of decline but had not begun to grow. Recalling that the economy shrunk by 5 percent in 1985, he said: ''For 1986, we had we had proposed to grow 6.5 percent. This was not possible.'' The economy came close to zero growth this year, however, and Mr. Ortega said planners hoped for a 2.1 percent growth rate in 1987. ''Nineteen-eighty-six was a year of great sacrifices, adding to the toll of pain and blood for the people of Nicaragua,'' he said. ''The year 1987 will be one of great challenges and sacrifices.'' Mr. Ortega, who is about to complete his second year in office, expressed support for what he described as popular movements in South Africa, Chile, El Salvador and Haiti. He said his Government was committed to democracy, but he warned that Nicaraguans who clamor for more political freedom should prove their good faith by ''first defending sovereignty, self-determination, the country's dignity.'' ''In 1986 the Congress of the United States approved the sending of military advisers, ammunition and transport, and $100 milion to continue terrorist actions in Nicaragua,'' he said. ''We must remain prepared to confront aggression.'' Honduran Fighting Cited Mr. Ortega referred to military campaigns that Nicaraguan troops conducted against contra bases near the border with Honduras in March and again in November and December. As has been his custom, he did not specify whether the fighting had been in Nicaragua or Honduras, but he charged that contras maintained bases in Honduras and were ''trying to invade our territory from Honduran territory.'' Honduran leaders asserted this month that Sandinista troops searching for contras had crossed into Honduras. They sent planes to bomb two targets inside Nicaragua in retaliation. Diplomats and military officers in Managua said they expected contra activity to increase over the coming months as weapons bought with American aid money began reaching rebel soldiers. The Government reported two fatal incidents over the weekend. Six people including two children were said to have died when contras attacked a farm cooperative near the ranching town of Amoapa in the central part of the country. In the border province of Jinotega, two men on a military truck carrying supplies to coffee pickers were killed and five others wounded when a mine exploded beneath them. Mr. Ortega said today that there had been 35,000 victims since the Nicaraguan war began five years go. That figure was understood to include all military and civilian dead, wounded and missing.
