870|1987\01\04|DECEMBER NOT COLD ENOUGH? BE PATIENT, AN EXPERT ADVISES|THOSE who swear that winters were colder and blustier and Christmases whiter when they were young are usually not right, according to meteorologists and climatologits in New Jersey.|THOSE who swear that winters were colder and blustier and Christmases whiter when they were young are usually not right, according to meteorologists and climatologits in New Jersey. THOSE who swear that winters were colder and blustier and Christmases whiter when they were young are usually not right, according to meteorologists and climatologits in New Jersey. ''These observations are anecdotal and based on mistaken recollections,'' said Mark D. Shulman, the head of meteorology and physical oceanography at Rutgers University's Cook College. ''People who remember snow up to their chins when they were kids forget that they were only two or three feet tall at the time.'' Nevertheless, the experts say, it is true that New Jersey, even though small, has varied weather, attributable to differences in latitude, topography and environment, urban or rural. As a study by the National Weather Service showed several years ago, New Jersey, like the rest of the northern hemisphere, has been warming up ever so slightly in recent decades. However, Dr. Shulman and others said the temperature rise was minuscule - a fraction of a degree celsius over three decades. Still, the state probably is just as cold this month as when grandma was a girl. Keith R. Arneson, a meteorologist at Rutgers, said in a recent interview last week that the average December temperature in the central part of the state had been running slightly above the annual average of 34 degrees, as well as being slightly warmer to the north and colder to the south. People who now live in a different part of the state than they did when they were children, or those who live in cities where heavy industry has increased over the decades, could be more accurate about getting less snow. Eugene Hathaway, a weather specialist for the National Weather Service at Newark International Airport, explained that warm industrial stack emissions, as well as concrete and pavement, tended to raise temperatures in cities such as Newark and Jersey City. Upon reaching the low atmosphere, Mr. Hathaway said, the snow turns to sleet or rain. Sometimes, he said, chemical pollution hanging over the cities can break up entire cloud masses so that snow may fall in the far western part of Essex County and not in Newark or adjacent Belleville. Mr. Hathaway and Dr. Shulman noted separately that there were significant differences in temperature and snowfall in the southern and northern parts of the state because of simple contrasts in latitude and topography. In Sussex County, for example, higher altitude can account for temperatures 10 degrees colder than, say, in New Brunswick. Sussex and the entire northwestern part of the state receive an average of 45 inches of snow each year. The central part receives 25 to 30 inches, and Cape May and Cumberland Counties get 15 inches. Some of the confusion about the wide variations in temperature and precipitation can be laid to weather forecasts and individual reports, Dr. Shulman said. Although there can be great variations from even one town to another, he said, some of the differences arise from inaccuracy. The only two official weather stations in the state, he noted, are in Newark and Atlantic City (the Weather Service in Philadelphia forecasts for those parts of southern New Jersey not covered by Atlantic City). Local temperature and precipitation readings taken outside these official weather stations often can be amiss, Dr. Shulman said. For example, he said, some inaccuracies come from the Weather Channel, a regional cable-television station that relies on local cable companies to take the average temperatures that are reported as ''local temperatures.'' ''The Weather Channel,'' Dr. Shulman said, ''invested millions of dollars in instruments for these local stations, and it probably was a big mistake. They are very inaccurate because quality control is impossible.'' Mr. Hathaway said that the National Weather Service and the Weather Channel relied on laymen or ''contract observers,'' who run ''cooperative'' weather stations. To get accurate readings, he said, thermometers and rain gauges at these unofficial stations are supposed to be placed 100 feet from the nearest building or obstruction, six feet from the ground over a nonpaved grass surface and facing north. In one instance, Mr. Hathaway said, the Weather Service discovered that a contract observer in the north had placed his instruments 12 inches from the outside of a building, 18 inches from an indoor exhaust port that was emitting warm air and facing south. ''We sometimes find that there are substantial differences in temperature, or in rain or snow, between two observers who live a few blocks from each other,'' he said. As for white Christmases, Mr. Hathaway said there had been less than an inch to 2.9 inches of snow on Christmas Day in 1950, 1951, 1962, 1966 and 1976. The largest snowfall during the holidays, he said, occurred on Dec. 26, 27 and 28 in 1947, when there was a total of 25.6 inches. And those who believe December was not cold enough, Dr. Shulman says, should be patient; January, with an average temperature of 30 degrees, is the coldest month in New Jersey.
