873|1987\01\04|THE PROBLEMS PLAGUING OUR INNER-CITY SCHOOLS|It is disconcerting to observe the Pavlovian salivations of our educational ''Holy See'' in Trenton at the prospect of excommunicating the supervising staffs of our ''poor schools'' and replacing them with defenders of the educational faith ordained by Trenton.|It is disconcerting to observe the Pavlovian salivations of our educational ''Holy See'' in Trenton at the prospect of excommunicating the supervising staffs of our ''poor schools'' and replacing them with defenders of the educational faith ordained by Trenton. It is disconcerting to observe the Pavlovian salivations of our educational ''Holy See'' in Trenton at the prospect of excommunicating the supervising staffs of our ''poor schools'' and replacing them with defenders of the educational faith ordained by Trenton. It is equally discouraging to see our free press and mass media encourage this overt grab for power under the maudlin banner of ''Save the Children'' and give no thought to the fact that denying freedom and concentrating power in a totalitarian politically oriented state authority is not the answer to any problem in a free democratic society. And it is not the answer to the problems that plague our inner-city schools. The claim that ''poor'' schools can be changed to ''good'' schools by appointing supervisors and administrators who genuflect to every educational encyclical issued from Trenton is a study in over-simplification and an exercise in naivete. If all that is needed to have a good school is to have a good staff, the answer to the problems in education is ridiculously simple. Close the poor schools and bus the students to the good schools. Why wait 5 or 10 years to save the children when instant salvation is available a few miles down the road by bus? Newark students could go to Columbia High School in Maplewood and to Millburn High, Plainfield students could attend Westfield, New Brunswick students would go to Highland Park and Edison, and Asbury Park students would attend Deal, etc., etc. If Trenton does not accept this obvious solution, and if Westfield, Millburn and Edison are less than enthusiastic about accepting inner-city students, perhaps the problems in urban schools are more complex than Trenton realizes, and changing administrators will have less effect on education in the cities than on the porcine educational bureaucracy in Trenton. Who will fill these vacant, lucrative administrative positions created by the inquisition? Not bright young students with degrees in technical disciplines, in business and in the liberal arts. They recognize teaching as a pseudo profession. They are intelligent enough to stay out of it. They go where they can be creative, innovative, appreciated and compensated. Successful, tenured administrators secure in a serene and tranquil suburban environment who are waiting to retire, or to advance into positions soon to be vacated by an aging staff, are content with their ''bird in the hand.'' By default, we are left with the dropouts from industry, ''the alternate methods'' who have decided to try teaching for a year or two to see what it's like. They will listen to Trenton and do as they are told . . . and if everything is not perfect in this best of all possible educational worlds, they will return to their first love, industry, and the poor schools will still be with us. If, after five years, the poor schools remain poor, the fault cannot be attributed to the ordained supervisors. The failure will result from the inability of the annointed to rid the system of the tenured heretics. In this case, we must cancel tenure, purge education of the heretics, replace them with the faithful and appoint a commissioner for life with absolute power to save the children, and the problems in New Jersey education will be solved forever and ever. MELVILLE H. GAUGHAN Edison The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer's name, address and telephone number. Letters should be addressed to Editor, New Jersey Weekly, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.
