874|1987\01\04|Thailand Closes Big Refugee Camp|Khao I Dang, the sprawling refugee city of bamboo and thatch that once sheltered 140,000 Cambodians, was closed last week by the Government of Thailand. Its 27,268 remaining residents must now leave the United Nations-supervised camp, which appeared in the film ''The Killing Fields.'' For most of those still at Khao I Dang, hope of resettlement in the West was dashed.|Khao I Dang, the sprawling refugee city of bamboo and thatch that once sheltered 140,000 Cambodians, was closed last week by the Government of Thailand. Its 27,268 remaining residents must now leave the United Nations-supervised camp, which appeared in the film ''The Killing Fields.'' For most of those still at Khao I Dang, hope of resettlement in the West was dashed. Khao I Dang, the sprawling refugee city of bamboo and thatch that once sheltered 140,000 Cambodians, was closed last week by the Government of Thailand. Its 27,268 remaining residents must now leave the United Nations-supervised camp, which appeared in the film ''The Killing Fields.'' For most of those still at Khao I Dang, hope of resettlement in the West was dashed. Reclassified as ''displaced persons'' to be eventually returned to Cambodia, they will be sent to camps run by resistance groups. Thailand had been trying to close Khao I Dang for months but delayed while waiting in vain for the West to take more of the refugees from its Vietnam-dominated neighbors. Most of those remaining lack family connections abroad and suitable work skills or are suspected of ties to the Khmer Rouge, which ruled Cambodia in a reign of terror in the late 1970's. The State Department said it was concerned about the closing. Prasong Soonsiri, secretary general to the Thai Prime Minister, said 120,620 Cambodians, Laotians and Vietnamese who had been counted as refugees remained in Thailand, including tens of thousands of children born in the camps. More than 500,000 have been resettled abroad and 44,000 sent home, he said, ''voluntarily.'' An additional 267,453 Cambodians who have never been accepted as refugees were pushed into Thailand during fighting between guerrillas and Vietnam-backed Cambodian forces. THE WORLD
