875|1987\01\04|O'Connor Learns As He Goes|Like many prominent Americans before him, John Cardinal O'Connor visited the Middle East last week proclaiming good will, only to encounter a storm of regional bitterness. The Archbishop of New York had been invited to Israel by Shimon Peres, who was then Prime Minister, but after a telephone call from a Vatican representative, he canceled plans to meet top Israeli leaders in their|Like many prominent Americans before him, John Cardinal O'Connor visited the Middle East last week proclaiming good will, only to encounter a storm of regional bitterness. The Archbishop of New York had been invited to Israel by Shimon Peres, who was then Prime Minister, but after a telephone call from a Vatican representative, he canceled plans to meet top Israeli leaders in their Like many prominent Americans before him, John Cardinal O'Connor visited the Middle East last week proclaiming good will, only to encounter a storm of regional bitterness. The Archbishop of New York had been invited to Israel by Shimon Peres, who was then Prime Minister, but after a telephone call from a Vatican representative, he canceled plans to meet top Israeli leaders in their Jerusalem offices. The Cardinal said he had ''made a mistake'' and ''failed to be sufficiently thorough in my preparations.'' The Vatican, like many other states, has not accepted Jerusalem as Israel's capital or its annexation of East Jerusalem after the 1967 war. Some American Jewish leaders said the Cardinal's visit should be canceled, noting that he was meeting King Hussein in Jordan. He also visited Palestine refugee camps and reiterated support for Palestinian ''self-determination,'' a formulation rejected by Israel. Crossing into Israel, Cardinal O'Connor went first to St. Saviour's Church in East Jerusalem, where he apologized ''for any offenses that might have been perceived by those who govern Israel.'' Later, he called on the city's mayor, Teddy Kollek, and met with the Minister of Religious Affairs, Zevulon Hammer. THE WORLD
