876|1987\01\04|Iran and U.S. Fail To Settle Account|A major if not overriding reason for the Reagan Administration's secret sale of arms to Iran was to obtain the release of American hostages in Lebanon. Although that was not the explicit aim behind last week's unsuccessful talks on the return of $500 million in Iranian assets held in the United States, the hostages seemed to be on everyone's mind.|A major if not overriding reason for the Reagan Administration's secret sale of arms to Iran was to obtain the release of American hostages in Lebanon. Although that was not the explicit aim behind last week's unsuccessful talks on the return of $500 million in Iranian assets held in the United States, the hostages seemed to be on everyone's mind. A major if not overriding reason for the Reagan Administration's secret sale of arms to Iran was to obtain the release of American hostages in Lebanon. Although that was not the explicit aim behind last week's unsuccessful talks on the return of $500 million in Iranian assets held in the United States, the hostages seemed to be on everyone's mind. The Iranians have said that if Washington returns its money, the amount they overpaid in a 1981 deal to retire some bank loans plus interest, they might be inclined to use their leverage with militants in Lebanon. Although the United States is ''not willing to negotiate with that as our objective,'' Abraham D. Sofaer, the State Department's legal adviser, said, it ''will be grateful'' for the return of the five Americans now held hostage. Both countries said that progress was made in the talks at The Hague last week. But the Iranians accused the United States of not dealing in ''good faith'' after American representatives postponed the next session. Late in the week, the Iranian Prime Minister, Mir Hussein Moussavi, reportedly denied any link between the money and the hostages. The Administration recognizes that the money belongs to Iran. But, some critics argue, with the furor over the Iran arms sale still simmering, it is in no rush to hand it over, lest the impression be given that it is giving in to Teheran. THE WORLD
