878|1987\01\04|DETOUR|WITH only a year of life left before being replaced by a modern bridge, the two-lane Woods Bridge in Somers, which carries 16,000 trucks and cars a day, was declared unsafe just before Christmas and closed to traffic, sending travelers on detours of six or 10 miles.|WITH only a year of life left before being replaced by a modern bridge, the two-lane Woods Bridge in Somers, which carries 16,000 trucks and cars a day, was declared unsafe just before Christmas and closed to traffic, sending travelers on detours of six or 10 miles. WITH only a year of life left before being replaced by a modern bridge, the two-lane Woods Bridge in Somers, which carries 16,000 trucks and cars a day, was declared unsafe just before Christmas and closed to traffic, sending travelers on detours of six or 10 miles. Herbert S. Moores, assistant to the regional director of the Department of Transportation, said inspectors had found that several of the hangers that carry the weight of the deck beams had deteriorated and ''could have created a failure in the deck system that possibly could have had a domino effect.'' He said he could not speculate on what could happen, but one possibility is that a heavily loaded truck could fall through the deck into the water. The bridge was built in 1904 and is 330 feet long. A few years ago, the state posted the bridge with a 20-ton limit because ''over time, steel deteriorates'' and cannot carry either the load it was designed for or the heavier loads of today's traffic, Mr. Moores said. The department discovered the flaws when the engineers made a special inspection of all posted bridges in anticipation of heavy loads of sand and salt they would carry during the winter. A bid was awarded in December to Felix Industries of Lincolndale to build a new two-lane span next to Woods Bridge by the end of this year. Traffic would then be switched to the new span, Woods Bridge would be demolished and another two-lane span would be built in its place. The new bridge had been planned partly because of the move of Pepsico and International Business Machines to Somers. Pepsico is scheduled to open in the spring, with about 1,500 employees and 1,200 cars added to traffic each day, and I.B.M. is scheduled to open late next year. Mr. Moores said the engineers were still deciding last week whether to reinforce the hangers with cables or structural steel. The work will be done by state employees and should be completed within a couple of weeks, he said. Supervisor D. Wayne Van Tassell of Somers said that because Somers is bounded on the east by reservoirs, the detours all involve bridges. Travelers between Somers and Katonah will now have to go north to the Route 138 bridge or south to Pines Bridge over on Route 100. Both are modern four-lane bridges capable of carrying additional traffic, Mr. Moores said. Mr. Van Tassel said traffic ''was not too bad'' after the bridge closed because it was light over the Christmas holiday. If the bridge is repaired as planned, it will be back in service well before the new influx of traffic. WESTCHESTER JOURNALL
