879|1987\01\04|Economy, and Trade Gap, on Rise|The news surprised economists, even though it sounded familiar: The nation's trade deficit in November was $19.2 billion, a record for a single month.|The news surprised economists, even though it sounded familiar: The nation's trade deficit in November was $19.2 billion, a record for a single month. The news surprised economists, even though it sounded familiar: The nation's trade deficit in November was $19.2 billion, a record for a single month. The big growth in the trade gap, which the Commerce Department announced last week, was on the import side - imports rose 20.5 percent from October, while exports dropped 3.8 percent. Experts surmised that importers had been racing against the Dec. 1 effective date for a new Customs Service fee. Still, while saying the numbers were not as bad as they looked, many economists were taken aback. Stuart A. Schweitzer, a vice president of Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, said the data ''raise questions about whether the trade accounts have turned around, as seemed to be the case by earlier figures.'' Analysts also attributed some acceleration in imports to nervousness about calls for trade restrictions -which, in turn, are rising with the deficit. Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the new Majority Leader, urged trade legislation ''that will restore jobs and halt the erosion of our industrial base.'' Partly in response to such pressures, the Administration announced that it was ending duty-free access on more than $3 billion in imports from developing nations including Taiwan and South Korea. In addition, the White House promised a 200 percent tariff on many European goods if the European Community does not offset American farmers' loss of Spain as a major grain market. Also last week, under pressure from the Administration, Canada agreed to impose a 15 percent export tax on lumber. If bad news on the trade deficit was largely discounted, so was the apparent good news in the index of leading economic indicators for November. The rise was 1.2 percent, the biggest since April. It was widely believed, however, that demand was spurred by changes in the tax law and that the November increase did not signal significant growth. THE NATION
