880|1987\01\04|A Big Little Airline That Couldn't|People Express, a six-year-old experiment in no-frills, low-cost air travel, flew into the sunset last week. Stockholders, who included the near-bankrupt line's pilots and ticket takers, voted to approve acquisition by Texas Air Corporation for close to $115 million. Losses were $245 million for the first nine months of 1986 and may have topped $300 million for the year.|People Express, a six-year-old experiment in no-frills, low-cost air travel, flew into the sunset last week. Stockholders, who included the near-bankrupt line's pilots and ticket takers, voted to approve acquisition by Texas Air Corporation for close to $115 million. Losses were $245 million for the first nine months of 1986 and may have topped $300 million for the year. People Express, a six-year-old experiment in no-frills, low-cost air travel, flew into the sunset last week. Stockholders, who included the near-bankrupt line's pilots and ticket takers, voted to approve acquisition by Texas Air Corporation for close to $115 million. Losses were $245 million for the first nine months of 1986 and may have topped $300 million for the year. People's fast takeoff and bumpy landing coincided with Federal deregulation of airlines. Beginning as a small operation in an old terminal at Newark International Airport, People's grew fast - too fast, conceded Donald C. Burr, the line's founder and chairman. By 1985, it had gone deeply into debt and owed $60.5 million in annual interest - far more than operating income. Established airlines matched People's low fares, luring away passengers as well as personnel who worked for low pay and a share of profits that dwindled and disappeared. . The buyer, Frank Lorenzo, chairman of Houston-based Texas Air, now heads the country's largest airline holding company. His company bought Eastern Airlines and part of Frontier earlier last year and also owns Continental and New York Air. Securities analysts disagreed as to how these and other airline mergers would affect fares and service. Some said discount fares would be fewer and that some sizable cities might soon be served by only a single airline. Other analysts believe the remaining large airlines will square off, using lower-paid employees and efficient new planes and equipment to put pressure on prices. THE NATION
