881|1987\01\04|JUDICIAL VACANCIES|With unanimous support from the party's executive committee, the names of two Westchester Democrats have been forwarded to Governor Cuomo for appointment to judicial posts left vacant after the November elections.|With unanimous support from the party's executive committee, the names of two Westchester Democrats have been forwarded to Governor Cuomo for appointment to judicial posts left vacant after the November elections. With unanimous support from the party's executive committee, the names of two Westchester Democrats have been forwarded to Governor Cuomo for appointment to judicial posts left vacant after the November elections. John Carey, a lawyer and four-term former Rye Mayor, has been recommended for the vacancy on the State Supreme Court in the Ninth Judicial District, and Valerie Somersille, a White Plains lawyer, and director of the state's Division of Economic Opportunity, is the choice of the Westchester Democrats to fill a vacancy on the Family Court bench. Democrats hope Mr. Carey will be selected to fill a vacancy caused by the recent death of Justice Timothy Sullivan, and that Ms. Somersille will be chosen to fill the Family Court opening after Judge Sondra Miller of Larchmont won election to the Supreme Court. ''I'm making no predictions on what the Governor will do,'' Richard L. Weingarten, the County Democratic Party chairman, said last week. ''Because Westchester recommends, does not mean the Governor will accept.'' Asked about grumblings among the county's Democratic leaders that Governor Cuomo has ignored their recommendations in the past, Mr. Weingarten replied: ''For the most part, he has listened. The Governor's agenda is just different from mine.'' Acknowledging that the Governor ''thinks the recommendations of party chairmen are suspect,'' Mr. Weingarten said: ''We do judge people in a different context as the professional lawyers that we are. I think we have as much competence as judges, but Governor Cuomo chooses to listen more to the Office of Court Administration than he does to us.'' The office is the administrative and management agency for the state's courts. Although Mr. Weingarten conceded that the office does not have any official role in selecting nominees for judicial appointment, he said the Governor depends on the chief officers of that agency for advice. Mr. Weingarten described merit selection as ''hogwash and the height of absurdity'' and said, ''You can't select a judge by an exam.'' If the two people recommended by the county's Democrats are found qualified by the Governor's judicial-screening committee, however, Mr. Weingarten said he was confident that the Governor would appoint them to the posts. A decision from the Governor is expected in about a month. WESTCHESTER JOURNAL
