882|1987\01\04|PEOPLE LISTEN|When members of the Sales and Marketing Executives Club of Westchester troop into the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan on Friday to attend the annual business/economic/international forecast luncheon, they will hear the same speaker who has addressed the group for 47 consecutive years - Leo|When members of the Sales and Marketing Executives Club of Westchester troop into the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan on Friday to attend the annual business/economic/international forecast luncheon, they will hear the same speaker who has addressed the group for 47 consecutive years - Leo When members of the Sales and Marketing Executives Club of Westchester troop into the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan on Friday to attend the annual business/economic/international forecast luncheon, they will hear the same speaker who has addressed the group for 47 consecutive years - Leo Cherne. ''Maybe we're eligible for the 'Guinness Book of Records,' '' said Edward B. Flanagan, president of the Sales Executives Club of New York, of which the Westchester group is a part. ''Frankly, I don't know of any other group that has had the same speaker for 47 years in a row. But Leo Cherne is something special. He has answered critical questions with such astonishing accuracy that over the years he has attracted the attention of chairmen, presidents and chief exeutive officers of the country's leading organizations.'' This year Mr. Cherne will be introduced by Hugh Downs, the television personality and newsman. Mr. Flanagan recalled that back in 1940 when Mr. Cherne, then a young lawyer-economist from the Research Institute of America, was first scheduled to address the group, ''we were so unsure of his capabilities that we had a backup speaker waiting in the wings.'' Mr. Flanagan added: ''But what did Mr. Cherne do? He astonished the membership by warning them that the country was facing maximum danger, a war from the Far East.'' Mr. Cherne was mocked for his forecast, Mr. Flanagan said, ''by almost every respected publication in the country -until Dec. 7, 1941.'' And Mr. Cherne has been right on target with his forecasts ever since, according to Mr. Flanagan. ''At the last count, his batting average for his projections was 87 percent correct on domestic issues, and 91 percent correct on international issues,'' he said. Among the topics to be covered in Mr. Cherne's talk this week, entitled ''We Are No Longer in the World We Knew,'' is the declining competitiveness of the United States. Mr. Cherne, the founder and executive director of the Manhattan-based Research Institute of America, is a 1983 recipient of the Medal of Freedom, the country's highest civilian award. WESTCHESTER JOURNAL
