885|1987\01\04|The Steady Rise Of Homelessness|New York City has continued to send homeless families to New Jersey when its own shelters are full, and last week the new head of the city's Human Resources Administration said he expected the practice to continue at least until the spring, when new city shelters are scheduled to open. As of last week, about 80 homeless families from New York were in New|New York City has continued to send homeless families to New Jersey when its own shelters are full, and last week the new head of the city's Human Resources Administration said he expected the practice to continue at least until the spring, when new city shelters are scheduled to open. As of last week, about 80 homeless families from New York were in New New York City has continued to send homeless families to New Jersey when its own shelters are full, and last week the new head of the city's Human Resources Administration said he expected the practice to continue at least until the spring, when new city shelters are scheduled to open. As of last week, about 80 homeless families from New York were in New Jersey hotels. ''We're on the edge with this problem,'' said William J. Grinker, who has held the job that includes caring for the homeless for only about a month. ''Just chasing the numbers is a problem for us.'' New York City is now sheltering nearly 4,600 families, a 13 percent increase over last year. Officials say an average of about 450 families enter the city's shelter system every month, and only about 400 leave. Some number-chasing by officials in the city and elsewhere last week produced these estimates of homeless people in the region, based on the numbers of those who have applied for help: About 27,000 in New York City, including the 4,600 families; 26,000 in New Jersey, 20,000 in Connecticut, 12,000 in Nassau and Suffolk Counties and 3,500 in Westchester County. Westchester, with few shelters, is housing many of its homeless in hotels and motels -many in other counties. THE REGION
