887|1987\01\04|WORKS BY SIBELIUS THAT AREN'T IN THE STANDARD REPERTORY|Critics have an inherent distrust of geniuses who take afternoons off, and the artist who produces a high quantity of dross along with the occasional masterpiece is automatically suspect. Sibelius produced a vast quantity of less than notable piano music, most of it charitably ignored while his famous symphonies perpetuate his fame.|Critics have an inherent distrust of geniuses who take afternoons off, and the artist who produces a high quantity of dross along with the occasional masterpiece is automatically suspect. Sibelius produced a vast quantity of less than notable piano music, most of it charitably ignored while his famous symphonies perpetuate his fame. Critics have an inherent distrust of geniuses who take afternoons off, and the artist who produces a high quantity of dross along with the occasional masterpiece is automatically suspect. Sibelius produced a vast quantity of less than notable piano music, most of it charitably ignored while his famous symphonies perpetuate his fame. Verdi is forgiven the sporadic excess of his early works because we hear in them the genesis of the late masterpieces. And presto! Verdi's career becomes an object lesson in the education of a composer - a comfortable pattern, easy to chart and to justify. Richard Strauss was once cited as a genius who ''burned out,'' who began brilliantly with the early tone poems and operas, and then repeated himself endlessly, with diminishing effect, for the rest of his career. Another comfortable pattern - the dissolution of a talent - and critics have found it easy to rely upon. But the truth, as usual, was more complex. As we came to know the radiant last works of Strauss, with their serenity and nostalgia, we charted the Strauss career rather differently. It was now said that the composer hit a slump and then, miraculously, recovered: ''What cleared his gaze?'' begins George Marek's summary of the late years in his popular biography. Today, many listeners have discovered that the middle works of Strauss have a fascination all their own. They are less even than the early and late works, perhaps, but still occasionally hit home. So what to make of Sibelius? Here is a man who produced masterpieces and kitsch, cheek by jowl, for some 30 years, and then stopped composing altogether. Along with the tone poems and symphonies - at least four of the latter of which would make most lists of 20th-century masterworks - exist a vast quantity of songs, chamber music, piano compositions, and so on. The familiar String Quartet ''Voces Intimae'' has entered the repertory, as have a few of the songs. But most of Sibelius's nonorchestral music is a mystery to the general public. Is this fair? Well, yes and no. The piano music - more than 100 compositions, almost all of them less than five minutes in duration - is, for the most part, shockingly bad. And not the sort of ''so-bad-it's-great'' that brings us pleasure in an Edward G. Wood film or in a Florence Foster Jenkins record. These pieces are not only bad, but uninteresting: conventional, late romantic intermezzo pieces without character or individuality, along the lines of the ''Album Leaves'' that used to fill early 20th century piano anthologies - Ethelbert Nevin without the tunes. Still, a few of the piano pieces have some distinction. Glenn Gould admired the three Sonatinas, which have just been recorded by Erik J. Tawastsjerna, a pianist and the son of Sibelius's biographer. To Gould, these works had the same ''spartan concision, bordering on the singy, that is found in the symphonies, but their idiom is almost neo-Classical.'' And a lovely little Romance in D-flat once attained some fame (a classic recording by Eileen Joyce is still available on Finlandia 003). Those who have a fancy for this unassuming mood music might investigate the two recent releases: Mr. Tawaststjerna has recorded the Sonatinas on BIS 196 and some miniatures on BIS 230, while the first recordings of these works, made by the late Cyril Szalkiewicz in the 1950's, have been reissued on two Finlandia recordings (FA 802, 804). Mr. Tawaststjerna plays well and has superior sonics, while Mr. Szalkiewicz's performances have the seal of approval directly from the composer, who heard and encouraged the young man. Sibelius's music for violin and piano is equally unassuming, but rather more likable. It is hard to reconcile these romances and caprices with the masterly Violin Concerto, but they are beguiling in their own way - Northern ''potted palm'' music - and a recording by the violinist Yuval Yaron and the pianist Rena Stipelman on Finlandia 301 is characterized by a sweet tone and direct simplicity. The Sibelius songs, of course, are quite another story. This is a major body of work, and many of them are wonderfully concise and dramatic. A few are regularly heard in concert; the reason more are not in the repertory is not due to any faults in the music but instead, most likely, to the unfamiliarity of the Finnish and Swedish languages. In any event, the songs have been admirably served on disk in recent years, most notably by the superb baritone Jorma Hynninen. Two of his recitals of Sibelius songs are now available: a two-record set, issued on Finlandia in 1980 (FA 202) and an earlier one, recorded in 1975, but only now generally available in this country (Harmonia Mundi France, HMC 5142). The early record can be recommended only to those who want to experience embryonic versions of the masterful product Hynninen would later produce. His voice was already beautiful, but his interpretations do not have the incision and immediacy we find on the later record. The complete songs have now been recorded for Argo, by the baritone Tom Krause, the soprano Elisabeth Soderstrom, the pianists Irwin Gage and Vladimir Ashkenazy, and the guitarist Carlos Bonell. It's largely Mr. Krause's show; Miss Soderstrom sings with power and artistry, but she only has about a dozen songs, and her voice is not what it was. Mr. Krause is as fine as this listener has ever heard him, delivering performances that are straightforward but with no lack of subtlety, befitting the combination of folkish simplicity and self-conscious artistry that we find in the songs. (Argo 411-739-1, five disks). We have mentioned the one mature quartet from Sibelius's pen, the ''Voces Intimae.'' There are two early works of more than merely archival attention which have just been recorded by the Sibelius Academy Quartet (Finlandia FAD 345). The Quartet in A Minor (1889) and the Quartet in B-flat may call the works of Dvorak to mind: they are melodic, rather determinedly folksy, and have been been well served by the players. All of the recordings mentioned above are available only on standard, long-playing disks.
