888|1987\01\04|Compensation for Astronauts' Families|Eleven months after the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, the Government has reached settlements with the survivors of four of the seven crew members. The Justice Department said last week that each family would receive ''payments over an extended period of time.''|Eleven months after the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, the Government has reached settlements with the survivors of four of the seven crew members. The Justice Department said last week that each family would receive ''payments over an extended period of time.'' Eleven months after the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, the Government has reached settlements with the survivors of four of the seven crew members. The Justice Department said last week that each family would receive ''payments over an extended period of time.'' Agreements were reached with the families of Francis R. Scobee, the mission commander; Air Force Lieut. Col. Ellison S. Onizuka, Gregory B. Jarvis and Christa McAuliffe, the New Hampshire schoolteacher who was to be the nation's first ''ordinary citizen'' in space. The families had filed administrative claims against the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and in the settlement waived any further claims related to the accident. The Government still has not settled the $15 million claim filed by Jane Smith, the widow of Comdr. Michael John J. Smith of the Navy, the Challenger's pilot. Cheryl McNair, the widow of Ronald McNair, a NASA physicist, has filed suit against the booster-rocket manufacturer and was not involved in the negotiations. A Justice Department spokesman said discussions were continuing with the family of the seventh astronaut, Judith A. Resnick, although they have not filed any claim. At the families' request, the Justice Department did not disclose the amounts to be paid. Several Justice Department sources said, however, that each family would receive more than $750,000. IDEAS & TRENDS
