889|1987\01\04|Trying to Tame an Exotic Technology|When electrical current moves through wire, it encounters an energy-sapping phenomenon called resistance. The conductor's atoms impede the flow, causing power to dissipate as heat. But as temperatures near absolute zero many substances become superconductors, offering no resistance.|When electrical current moves through wire, it encounters an energy-sapping phenomenon called resistance. The conductor's atoms impede the flow, causing power to dissipate as heat. But as temperatures near absolute zero many substances become superconductors, offering no resistance. When electrical current moves through wire, it encounters an energy-sapping phenomenon called resistance. The conductor's atoms impede the flow, causing power to dissipate as heat. But as temperatures near absolute zero many substances become superconductors, offering no resistance. For years, scientists have worked on devices that exploit this physical loophole: high-speed computers, fusion reactors, magnetically levitated trains. Superconductivity could conceivably be used to transmit power more efficiently, saving billions of dollars in lost energy. But supercooling a conductor is difficult and expensive. Last week researchers announced breakthroughs that might ameliorate the task. A scientist at the University of Houston reported that by subjecting a chemical compound to extreme pressures, he had raised the temperature at which superconductivity occurs from 24 to 40.2 degrees Kelvin. On the Kelvin scale, 0 is absolute zero and water freezes at about 273 degrees. Meanwhile, scientists at A.T.&T. Bell Laboratories said they had found an alloy that under normal pressures exhibited superconductivity at a temperature not substantially lower than in the Houston experiment. These developments enable scientists to use liquid hydrogen as a coolant instead of more expensive liquid helium. If the threshold can be raised much further, even cheaper liquid nitrogen could be used. Then superconductivity might begin to leave the realm of the exotic for what observers believe could be a multibillion-dollar market. IDEAS & TRENDS
