890|1987\01\04|'Bama Search Is On|EVER since Ray Perkins left open the University of Alabama football coaching job last Wednesday to return to the National Football League as coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the names of several prominent head coaches names have been mentioned for the job, including Bill Curry of Georgia Tech, Steve Sloan of Duke and Bobby Bowden of Florida State.|EVER since Ray Perkins left open the University of Alabama football coaching job last Wednesday to return to the National Football League as coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the names of several prominent head coaches names have been mentioned for the job, including Bill Curry of Georgia Tech, Steve Sloan of Duke and Bobby Bowden of Florida State. EVER since Ray Perkins left open the University of Alabama football coaching job last Wednesday to return to the National Football League as coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the names of several prominent head coaches names have been mentioned for the job, including Bill Curry of Georgia Tech, Steve Sloan of Duke and Bobby Bowden of Florida State. But when Bowden announced late Friday night that he was taking his name out of consideration, the field grew narrower for one of college football's most prestigious coaching jobs. The 44-year-old Curry was interviewed for the job Friday at the request of Joab Thomas, the school president, who telephoned him. To point the guessing game in his direction, Curry yesterday relayed word to reporters in Atlanta, telling them to be in Tuscaloosa, Ala., today for an afternoon news conference. Later, Alabama confirmed there would be a news conference at 2 P.M. today at which Thomas would name the replacements for both head coach and athletic director. Both positions were held by Perkins and his predecessor, Paul (Bear) Bryant, but Thomas wants two people for the jobs now. Curry, who has compiled a seven-year, 31-43-4 record, including a 5-5-1 this season, refused to disclose any other details. ''I simply cannot comment,'' Curry said in a brief news release issued yesterday by the Georgia Tech sports information office. ''I just can't discuss it at this time.'' But Sloan, who is 42 and was once a quarterback at Alabama, remains in the running after his meeting with an Alabama panel Friday. He has been a head coach since he was 28. SPORTS PEOPLE
