893|1987\01\04|CAUCUS A VICTIM OF CHANGING TIMES|THE New England Congressional Caucus closed its doors last week, a victim of changing times and the Gramm-Rudman budget-balancing law. The New England Congressional Institute, which provided research and analysis to the caucus, also has closed.|THE New England Congressional Caucus closed its doors last week, a victim of changing times and the Gramm-Rudman budget-balancing law. The New England Congressional Institute, which provided research and analysis to the caucus, also has closed. THE New England Congressional Caucus closed its doors last week, a victim of changing times and the Gramm-Rudman budget-balancing law. The New England Congressional Institute, which provided research and analysis to the caucus, also has closed. Formed during the oil crisis of the early 70's, the caucus was comprised of the 24 Representatives from New England. Prior to Gramm-Rudman, its operating expenses for four full-time and 18 part-time employees was $75,000 to $80,000 a year, the money coming out of the budgets of each of the Representatives. Although no current figures were available, staff members said the caucus's budget has dropped steadily since the adoption of Gramm-Rudman, as members were less willing to sustain a body that cut into their legislative expense accounts. Moreover, lawmakers found that the need to operate the agenda-setting caucus for New England was inversely proportional to the region's economy, which has prospered a great deal more over the last several years than has the Federal budget. The improved economy of the region ''in some sense put a damper on the crisis environment that really moved the members to work together,'' said Bailey Spencer, executive director of the caucus from 1981 to 1984. ''In politics, when times are good, it is more difficult to organize a kind of broad coalition to work together towards a common goal.'' But during the OPEC oil crisis in 1973 the New England delegation had little difficulty convening in emergency session. ''The caucus was formed during the period when the energy crisis was front-page news,'' said Michael Sheehy, legislative director to Representative Edward P. Boland, the Massachusetts Democrat who was co-chairman of the caucus. ''It existed almost in a direct relationship to the visibility to energy problems, and as they became less visible and the Northeast economy improved, members saw less of a need for these unifying actions.'' With the influence of Massachusetts Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who became Speaker of the House in 1976, the caucus spearheaded low-income energy assistance programs and repeatedly fended off proposals to impose oil-import fees. The caucus also succeeded at moving through Congress legislation aimed at conservation of the coastal environment, clean water laws, tax benefits for the use of renewable energy resources and most recently, acid rain legislation. In addition to the assistance of Mr. O'Neill and Mr. Boland, the caucus was aided by the leadership of Representative Silvio O. Conte, a Massachusetts Republican who was its co-chairman. Both Mr. Conte and Mr. Boland are influential members of the Committee on Appropriations, which sets financing for the Departments of the Interior and Energy. But the caucus could not survive on leadership alone, and with its livelihood dependent on the generosity of a Representative's pocketbook, it and dozens of other informal regional organizations have fallen on bad times. Over the last two years the appropriation for legislative services, including staffing, has dropped. In addition, the Gramm-Rudman budget balancing law, which was passed last December, required Congress to handle its own money more austerely. Although most of the larger Congressional caucuses will survive the current budget crunch, staff members expressed concern that the organizations, which provide expertise on complex issues, will continue to dwindle. Mr. Sheehy described Gramm-Rudman as ''the crowning blow,'' because while it required uniform cuts of 4.3 percent in Congressional expenses, nearly all lawmakers were faced with having to institute 10 percent cuts for the remainder of fiscal 1986 to make up for the normal levels of spending they had operated under for the first six months of the year. ''Members found that with reductions in those accounts that in some cases they had to forego paying their interns or had to let staff people go,'' he said. ''The caucus became too costly for the majority of members to afford.'' The New England Congressional Institute, in its heyday, was able to secure grants from the Department of Energy and private donations for up to $500,000 a year. Last year it collected $125,000, according to Howard N. Gaines, the outgoing director of the caucus. ''It became apparent to us that the institute wasn't operating at the manpower that we hoped it would,'' Mr. Gaines said. ''With that, the institute was spending too much time on fund raising.'' Mr. Gaines said that his last recommendation to the lawmakers was that they retain the ''structure'' of the caucus for future regional battles in Congress and in anticipation of increased financing in the future.
