895|1987\01\04|STUDENTS TO STAGE MUSICAL IN CHINA|DENISE GROCE is determined her bout with the flu will not keep her from the rigorous rehearsals needed to play Winifred, the plucky princess-to-be in a high-school production of ''Once Upon a Mattress,'' which may be the first American musical performed in China.|DENISE GROCE is determined her bout with the flu will not keep her from the rigorous rehearsals needed to play Winifred, the plucky princess-to-be in a high-school production of ''Once Upon a Mattress,'' which may be the first American musical performed in China. DENISE GROCE is determined her bout with the flu will not keep her from the rigorous rehearsals needed to play Winifred, the plucky princess-to-be in a high-school production of ''Once Upon a Mattress,'' which may be the first American musical performed in China. The 16-year-old from Bloomfield, who is a junior at Loomis Chaffee High School, is to be among a group of 28 students scheduled to visit China March 5 through 22 to give at least four performances of the play in the Shantung Province. ''I'm just so excited,'' said Miss Groce, who has been performing since she was 7 years old. ''I can't believe that at the age of 16 I'm going to be coming in contact with people from a totally different background. The shock of it is more than anything I've ever experienced so far.'' But these performances may be more than an exceptionally exotic road show. Dean Adams, an English teacher who is director of theater at the 700-student private school in Windsor, said Chinese officials have told him that the production may be the first American musical performed on the mainland. ''According to the Chinese Embassy in Washington, there has not been an American musical performed in China,'' Mr. Adams said. ''I'm not sure about whether there were any before the Cultural Revolution.'' Chinese officials are particularly interested in American musicals in general because they do not have any equivilant in their own culture, said Mr. Adams. But their interest seems ironic, since he and his wife, Kristin, who is choreographing the show, had to review some 150 musicals to find one that would meet the Chinese stipulations of ''no sex, no violence, no politics and no religion,'' he said. ''We scoured the American musical theater to find a play that didn't have one, let along all four,'' Mr. Adams said. ''But even 'Oklahoma!' has a knife fight. Other shows are very violent, even though the violence is stylized, as in 'West Side Story.' 'Pippin,' which is my favorite, has sex, politics, violence and religion all in the same show.'' The idea for a China trip was born two years ago, after the Loomis Chaffee students successfully staged ''The Dining Room'' in London. Each winter, the group performs a musical, and, in alternating years, that production is taken ''on the road,'' thus far to various European cities. After the London trip, Mr. Adams began considering taking the group to Asia, ''so I thought, 'why not try to go to China,' '' he said. Upon learning from Chinese officials that a musical had never been performed there, ''that only served to encourage us, not discourage us,'' he said. Mr. Adams decided to enlist the support of the State Department of Economic Development, and a letter outlining the proposal was presented to Chinese officials when the state's sister-city relationship was formally established with Shantung last May, said the Commissioner of Economic Development, John J. Carson. ''We're very excited about it,'' he said of the upcoming trip, adding his hope that this will pave the way toward more cultural exchanges between the two states since Governor O'Neill and Gov. Li Chang-an of Shantung signed the agreement proclaiming the sister status in May. That agreement calls for business and trade ties as well as cultural and sports exchanges. Under the agreement, a Chinese group would reciprocate the Loomis Chaffee visit later in the year or in early 1988, Mr. Adams said. He does not know what the Chinese students would perform, ''but anything they do will be fantastic,'' he said. The group is to perform ''Once Upon a Mattress'' under the title ''The Princess and the Pea,'' taken from the Hans Christian Andersen story it was originally based on, so ''because the word 'mattress' sounds a bit lewd,'' Mr. Adams noted. The musical was written and composed by Mary Rogers, Marshall Barier and Jay Thompson and tells the story of a prince whose mother tests possible brides by placing a pea under their mattress, reasoning that the real princess would be so ''delicate'' she would detect the pea, Mr. Adams said. Although the play was not his first choice, it bears similarities to Chinese theater, which is often based on mythology and fairy tales, he said. The play is also easy-to-understand, which should be a boon because the production is to be performed in English and no translators are to be used. A synopsis of the play is to be translated into Chinese and included in the program, he said. With the acceptance of the proposal, fund raising is now under way, said Mr. Adams. According to him, the total cost of the project, including transportation, is $90,000, of which the school is paying $12,000. Parents of students who can afford it are to pay the entire tab of $2,586 a student, but the group is trying to raise $33,000 to enable a number of students who attend the school on full or partial scholarships to attend. About half of that sum has been raised. The fund-raising deadline is Jan. 15, he said. Under the reciprocal agreement, the Chinese Government would pay some of the lodging costs, he added. To raise the money, students are seeking contributions and selling program advertisements to corporations that have business interests in China. In addition to fund raising, staging a production in China ''is certainly the most ambitious project we've undertaken, but it can be a logistical nightmare sometimes,'' said Mr. Adams. ''We're going to a place thousands of miles away, where they speak a different langugage. For example, while we know we'll arrive, we have no idea whether our scenery will, so we have to plan to do without.'' ''This is a student-to-student exchange, which is a little different than taking a Broadway production,'' he said. ''We're not expecting to do big performances in Beijing.'' Also, some of the students were initially a bit wary about traveling to China, so Mr. Adams is bringing in a series of lecturers to discuss the country's history and culture. ''The students were very skeptical at first,'' he said. ''China seemed foreign, remote and scary, but now the members of the company are all very excited.''
