896|1987\01\04|CONNECTICUT GUIDE|WORKS BY NEVELSON A rare opportunity to see a comprehensive exhibition of the work of Louise Nevelson without going into New York, is offered in the new show at the Whitney Museum in Stamford. Opening Wednesday through March 11, the show contains about 45 pieces of sculpture, paintings and prints done between the late 1920's and the present.|WORKS BY NEVELSON A rare opportunity to see a comprehensive exhibition of the work of Louise Nevelson without going into New York, is offered in the new show at the Whitney Museum in Stamford. Opening Wednesday through March 11, the show contains about 45 pieces of sculpture, paintings and prints done between the late 1920's and the present. WORKS BY NEVELSON A rare opportunity to see a comprehensive exhibition of the work of Louise Nevelson without going into New York, is offered in the new show at the Whitney Museum in Stamford. Opening Wednesday through March 11, the show contains about 45 pieces of sculpture, paintings and prints done between the late 1920's and the present. Best known for the compartmentalized sculptural walls, constructed of pieces of wood painted black, white or gold, Ms. Nevelson did not achieve prominence until 1958, when she was 58 years old. Her first major museum showing was at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1959, when she was included in an exhibition called ''Sixteen Americans.'' Ms. Nevelson was born in Kiev, Russia, in 1900 and came to this country with her family in 1905, settling in Rockland, Me. She moved to New York after her marriage to Charles Nevelson, and studied art here and abroad. Her first gallery showing was in 1933 at the Secession Gallery in Manhattan. The Whitney Museum in New York began collecting her work in 1956 and in 1967 mounted her first museum retrospective. Another exhibition of her paintings, sculptures, drawings and prints was held in 1970, and in 1980, as a joint celebration of the Whitney's 50th birthday and Ms. Nevelson's 80th, the museum presented an exhibition called ''Atmospheres and Environments,'' which contained five of Ms. Nevelson's room-size installations. Viewing hours are from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Tuesday through Saturday, and gallery talks are given at 12:30 P.M. Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. The Whitney is on the ground floor of the Champion International Building at Tresser Boulevard and Atlantic Street in Stamford. Admission is free. BENEFIT FOR CHILDREN Peter Yarrow of Peter, Paul and Mary will be the featured performer at a benefit concert a week from today from 4 to 5:30 P.M. at the New Canaan High School. The event is one of many staged each year by an organization called Horizons, which sends about 200 inner-city children to the New Canaan Country School for a six-week summer enrichment program. Horizons pays the tuition cost of $825 a student. Last summer, 110 children, ranging from 4 to 14 years old, were enrolled from Stamford, 60 from Norwalk, 20 from New Canaan and 1 from Wilton. The exceptionally varied program, which also includes breakfast, lunch and snacks, offers morning studies in math, English, science, art, music and computers while afternoons are devoted to baseball, basketball, soccer and swimming. In addition, the children grow their own vegetables, receive a dental examination and participate in weekly trips to the South Street Seaport in New York City, the Bronx Zoo, the Bruce Museum in Greenwich and other points of interest in Connecticut and New York. Perhaps one of the best perquisites is the opportunity for making friends among children who would not otherwise have an opportunity to be together in such an atmosphere. Many of them return several times. General admission to the concert is $10, reserved patron seating costs from $25 to $100. For reservations and more information call 972-0771, extension 231. Tickets may also be purchased at Bob's Sports Shop, 94 Park Street, Stamford. IN SEARCH OF EAGLES January and February are considered to be the best months for observing wintering bald eagles in this region. Two adults and four young birds have been seen at Northeast Utilities's Shepaug hydroelectric site in Southbury, where an expanded viewing area has just reopened. Employees of the Department of Environmental Protection and the utility company staff the viewing shelter, which is about 1,000 feet from the eagles's feeding area. The shelter has been enlarged to accommodate more people, and it also houses an exhibit about bald eagles in the state. The D.E.P. is doing a study of Connecticut's eagle population. The work, some of which is done at Shepaug, is expected to be completed in 1988. ''We can't guarantee that you will see eagles any time you go, but the likelihood is good,'' said Rita Maroncelli-Duclos of the Environmental Department. ''They perch in the daytime looking for fish in the Housatonic River, swooping down to catch them. The action of the power facility keeps the ice broken up and the swirling water sometimes stuns the fish, making them easier to catch. That's why the birds are attracted here. Sometimes the younger ones just fly around in what seems to be play. The older eagles tend to stay on their perches.'' Staff members find the birds with a spotting telescope, but binoculars are essential for individual birdwatchers. The shelter is open from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. Fridays through Mondays until March 15, except in very bad weather. To reach it, take South Britain Road, Exit 14 off I-84, go right off the exit, then left at the traffic light for one mile to a stop sign, then right on Fish Rock Road, which becomes River Road to the dam area, where signs point the way to the viewing site. Call 584-9830 for more information. BIRDS OF THE THAMES More than 15 other species of birds that winter on the Thames River will be the focus of a Winter Waterfowl Walk conducted by the Thames Science Center, Gallows Lane, New London from 3:30 to 5 P.M. Saturday. An assistant professor of zoology at Connecticut College, Robert Askins, will give a short talk at the center before leading the group along the waterside near Smith's Cove and Mamacoke Island. Male goldeneyes, mergansers and canvasbacks are among the ducks expected to be sighted, along with geese and swans. Warm clothing, binoculars and a $5 fee are all that is required. Call 442-0391 to register or obtain more information. FRENCH COMIC STRIPS Dominique Regney-Gillain is to give a talk about her father, the artist Joseph Gillain, at 3 P.M. Thursday in the Low-Heywood Thomas School, 1570 Newfield Avenue, Stamford. As is customary for lectures sponsored by the Alliance Francaise of Stamford, the talk, titled ''French Comic Strips,'' is to be in French. During a long career, until his death in 1980, Gillain created numerous comic strips that ran serially in weekly magazines in Belgium and France. Jerry Spring, an American cowboy and his sidekick, Poncho, were two of his best-known characters, inspired during several years spent in the United States. Tanguy and Laverdure are two more of his most popular characters. Many Gillain strips were translated into other European languages and some have continued publication, drawn by other artists. Admission to the program is $5 at the door. Mrs. Regney-Gillain, an artist in her own right, has lived in the United States for 20 years. Her husband, Noel Regney, is a composer who wrote, among other things, the Christmas carol ''Do You Hear What I Hear?'' Early in January she is to begin teaching French to small groups of children aged 4 to 10. ''It will be a special kind of teaching, relating the language to the arts, cooking and other cultural references,'' she said. Those interested in learning more about it may call her at 798-0006. MUSICAL CELEBRATION A few of Richard Vogt's friends are to help him celebrate his 20th anniversary as director of music at the First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich on Saturday. Dave Brubeck is to play the piano, joined by Cynthia Clarey, mezzo-soprano; John Aler, tenor; Jake Gardner, baritone; Bob Fortunato, singer-dancer, and Scott Youngs, organist. They will all follow the direction of Mr. Vogt's baton in a concert titled ''Joyful Noise'' at 5 P.M. and again at 7:30 P.M. The public is invited. Complimentary tickets are available by calling 637-1791.
