90|1987\01\01|ADDED INCENTIVE FOR ONE MORRIS|Jamie Morris has a chance to become the first known major college football player to walk around wearing the ring of a victorious player in the Super Bowl. All the Michigan junior tailback needs is one victory for himself Thursday in the Rose Bowl and three victories by the Giants.|Jamie Morris has a chance to become the first known major college football player to walk around wearing the ring of a victorious player in the Super Bowl. All the Michigan junior tailback needs is one victory for himself Thursday in the Rose Bowl and three victories by the Giants. Jamie Morris has a chance to become the first known major college football player to walk around wearing the ring of a victorious player in the Super Bowl. All the Michigan junior tailback needs is one victory for himself Thursday in the Rose Bowl and three victories by the Giants. Morris, the slick little running back, is the youngest of the three brothers of the Giants' slick little running back, Joe Morris. The two have agreed to trade bowl rings if Michigan beats Arizona State Thursday in the oldest bowl game and the Giants get to and win the Super Bowl -which will be played in the Rose Bowl on Jan. 25. ''We've been talking about it all year,'' said Jamie. ''Joe and I talk once or twice a week. It's about life in general. It's also about football. Once, when we talked before the season, we talked about maybe we could both get to the Rose Bowl this year. And I said then we could trade rings.'' Michigan No Surprise Such talk before the season was a longer shot for Joe, who seemed then to have less chance of getting to the Pasadena Super Bowl than Jamie had of making it to the New Year's Day Rose Bowl. Michigan, after all, entered this season favored to win the Big Ten title and get here. The Wolverines and Jamie lived up to expectations. The two excellent running backs are not exactly peas in a pod, but from a distance they appear much the same as they scamper and twist their ways for big gains. They're both 5 feet 7 inches tall and the sons of Earl Morris, another 5-7 running back who played high school football in St. Louis. Jamie and Joe and their two brothers and two sisters grew up in Ayer, Mass. Their father, a former Green Beret master sergeant in Vietnam, is a postmaster in Groton, Mass. Jamie and Joe differ for two notable reasons. Joe is stockier, weighing about 195 pounds to Jamie's 180. Joe and two other brothers, Mike and Larry, played in the Carrier Dome at Syracuse, where Joe broke the rushing records of Jimmy Brown, Floyd Little, Larry Csonka and Ernie Davis. Jamie went to Michigan, where he played in Michigan Stadium, an outdoor stadium so big that, he said, ''The first time I went out on that field I wanted to turn around and run off. I never saw so many people in my life.'' Regarded as Too Small Bo Schembechler, Michigan's coach, is from the old school. Even though he doesn't stand much taller than Jamie Morris, Schembechler said: ''I told Jamie when we recruited him he was too small to be a running back and we wanted him for running back kicks. I did, however, promise him the chance to try to be a running back for us. Good thing I did, isn't it?'' ''My friends thought I'd naturally go to Syracuse, what with three older brothers who were Syracuse football players,'' Jamie said. ''But Joe told me to go where I'd be happy. When I told him I thought I'd be happier at Michigan, he said, 'Go Blue.' '' The kick-return specialist role didn't last long. Jamie became very happy at Michigan in just his third game as a freshman when Schembechler put him in as the starting tailback. Except for times when injuries took their toll, Jamie has started at tailback for the Wolverines since. This season he seemed headed for a big season when a knee injury against Florida State forced him to sit out the Wisconsin game the following week. There appeared to be little chance the tailback would reach his goal of 1,000 yards rushing for the regular season. But in the final game against Ohio State - a game Michigan had to win to get to the Rose Bowl - Morris carried 29 times for 210 yards and a season total of 1,039 yards. Took Time to Heal ''That pop on the knee in the game against Florida State hassled me a lot,'' Jamie said. ''Even after I came back, the knee bothered me when I tried to cut. I finally felt good in the Purdue game and finally felt I was all the way back against Ohio State.'' Michigan played only two games on grass in 1986 - at Purdue and at Notre Dame - and won them both. The Rose Bowl has a grass field that Schembechler says ''isn't really very good.'' Morris isn't worried about slowing down on the grass, but he said, ''You have to learn to keep your feet under you more or else you'll slip. Because we beat Purdue and Notre Dame, I don't think the grass here will bother me.''  ROSE BOWL
