903|1987\01\04|Bowen Plan Showed Concern for Age's Terrors; Reform Medicare|To the Editor:  Your Dec. 15 editorial on Dr. Bowen's Medicare proposal ignores a number of key points that show the inadequacy of the recommended changes for older people.|To the Editor:  Your Dec. 15 editorial on Dr. Bowen's Medicare proposal ignores a number of key points that show the inadequacy of the recommended changes for older people. To the Editor:  Your Dec. 15 editorial on Dr. Bowen's Medicare proposal ignores a number of key points that show the inadequacy of the recommended changes for older people. Dr. Bowen's proposal, while eliminating some of the current co-pays and deductibles, retains others, including the most expensive (hospital deductible and both the Part B deductible and co-pay). Dr. Bowen stated recently that nothing comparable to his proposal exists in the private market. That is not the case. A number of ''medigap'' insurance policies, combined with Medicare Parts A and B, offer essentially the same coverage Dr. Bowen is proposing, with less annual liability than Dr. Bowen's $2,000 maximum. For example, the American Association of Retired Persons offers a policy nationally that, combined with Medicare, provides at least as much as Dr. Bowen proposes for less than $400 annually, including monthly premiums and the $75 Part B deductible not paid by the policy or Medicare. And it includes 365 additional hospital days beyond Medicare, subject to Medicare standards. A Medicare and Blue Cross-Blue Shield medigap package in my area of Pennsylvania costs about $500 annually. Why trade a $400 to $500 liability for $2,000? Some alternative suggestions: * Offer a Medicare program with no co-pays or deductibles. Co-pays and deductibles produce the massive confusion resulting in $3 billion yearly wasted by the elderly in excess and duplicate health-insurance premiums. Dr. Bowen's proposal does not remove the key points of con-fusion, and most would still buy supplemental insurance. * Replace the lost Medicare co-pay-deductible income with a monthly premium the elderly would pay in addition to the current Part B premium. Not having to pay for medigap insurance would free that money to pay the higher Medicare premium, with fuller coverage in one place and no paper work worries, as providers would handle claims directly with the Government, as occurs now with Medicare health-maintenance organizations. Obviously, physicians should also be required to accept the Medicare rate as payment in full, just as hospitals and nursing homes do. * Relate the additional premium to income. A person having $6,000 annual income shouldn't have to pay the same premium as one with $60,000 income. Medicare would still not be an income-eligible program but would also be based on a range of premiums, based on income. An income relationship precedent was established with the 1983 Social Security amendments taxing some of those benefits related to income. * If Congress will not totally eliminate Medicare co-pays-deductibles, then consider other proposals far preferable to Dr. Bowen's, such as one introduced in August by Representative Don Bonker of Washington. Medicare needs simplification. Its complexity is a national disgrace. Dr. Bowen's proposal minimizes some of that confusion, but not much, and offers little if anything, often less than Medicare's enrollment can get today by combining Medicare and a decent medigap policy. The biggest surprise is the reaction to the proposal by many, including you, that it will make a significant difference, rather than being seen as a mirage in the total picture of necessary Medicare reform. If this is the best we can hope for in the next Congressional session, then heaven help the elderly because worldly sources have decided not to do so.  PETER D. ARCHEY  Reading, Pa., Dec. 16, 1986  The writer is a consultant on aging and health systems.
