904|1987\01\04|TROUBLED FOSTER CHILDREN GET SPECIAL AID|THE most troubled of foster children - the destructive and even self-destructive -will be offered new chances for family life under a state program that is to start this month.|THE most troubled of foster children - the destructive and even self-destructive -will be offered new chances for family life under a state program that is to start this month. THE most troubled of foster children - the destructive and even self-destructive -will be offered new chances for family life under a state program that is to start this month. It is hoped that the program, being undertaken by the staff at the Norwich office of the state's Department of Children and Youth Services, will be a model for similar programs around the state. The Norwich office has received a $182,500 grant from the Federal Department of Health and Human Services to set up foster homes for particularly troubled youngsters and to provide assistance for both the foster parents and the natural families of the youngsters. The grant is one of five awarded throughout the nation, and the only one awarded to a state agency. In Connecticut, there are nearly 4,000 young people (from infants to 18-year-olds) who have been placed in care outside their own homes because they were neglected or abused in some way. About 1,750 are in licensed foster homes that care for up to five children. For some, however, regular foster homes do not work out. The supervisor of the Youth Services office in Norwich, Ann Quinn, said she had sought funds for specialized foster care after noticing how many ''really young children'' were being placed in special residential schools or in psychiatric hospitals after even experienced foster parents could not cope with their destructive, disturbing behavior. She described a 6-year-old foster child whose own parents had frequently left him alone, and had also left him with at least one person who sexually molested him. Under Youth Services care ''he'd been in three foster homes; in one, he lasted three days,'' Miss Quinn said. In one of the homes, the boy wrecked a television set. She said that troubled youngsters often not only damaged property, but also harmed animals, other people and themselves. Good institutions could often help such children, she said, but ''an institution is not a home. ''Over and over,'' she said, ''we saw that we needed an alternative. Across the state, there is a need to develop something in-between a regular foster home and an institution.'' With the Federal grant, staff members in the Norwich office are to recruit and train foster parents who will provide a home for just one child, not several. The staff is to provide therapy for the children, their foster parents and their natural families. They intend to help foster parents find services - from doctors and dentists to school programs - that the child may need, and to help the foster parents form support groups. Arrangements are to be set up so the foster parents can get a night or even a weekend off from their difficult jobs. Taking turns, the staff members are to be on call 24 hours a day for the foster parents. ''We're putting together a network of services for families,'' said social worker for the Norwich program, Deborah Hallas. Once the Norwich program is under way, the department plans to use state funds to establish similar programs in each of its five administrative regions. Each program is to serve 10 youngsters. These programs will help ''to prevent kids from being placed in institutions, and to move kids currently in institutions back into family environments,'' said the department's deputy commissioner for administrative services, Ralph Adkins. Youngsters who are in institutions and whose behavior has stabilized, but who are not ready to go to regular foster homes or to their own homes, can be placed in special foster care, he said. The Norwich staff members stressed that the goal of the program was to return youngsters to their natural parents, and that they would work with both natural and foster parents. Miss Quinn said people who neglect and abuse their children often had parents who did the same to them. ''We want to break that cycle,'' she said. She said the program would aid natural parents who had problems with drugs or alcohol, or were simply ''overwhelmed.'' In addition, the foster parents will be asked to talk with the natural parents and to encourage visits between the child and his natural parents. People who want to help troubled youngsters may be angry at those who hurt them in the first place, said the coordinator of the Norwich program, Steven Roe. But, he said, special foster parents will ''need to go out of their way to become friends of the natural parents.'' Regular foster parents who have cared for youngsters with serious problems say the new program sounds helpful. Training can help foster parents recognize signs of deprivation and abuse, said Dana Clark of Old Saybrook, who has cared for 46 children, usually about three at a time, over the past six years. Training can also help them manage troubled youngsters, she said. ''It takes a lot of imagination to help these kids get some structure in their lives,'' she said. She said help from the department in finding medical services for foster children would be especially important. Many physicians used to middle-class patients are not very helpful in treating foster children whose disrupted lives compounded their medical problems, she said, nor did such physicians welcome the complicated forms involved in billing the state for the youngsters' treatment. Norwich staff members said that they had sought advice from Mrs. Clark and other foster parents when developing the program and that they expect the special program to help focus attention on ways to improve foster care in general. Miss Quinn and her staff are now seeking people willing to tackle, and stick to, the job of giving specialized foster care. Training for the program is to start later this month. Special foster parents will receive stipends of about $600 a month, slightly more than regular foster parents. The Youth Services office in Norwich serves 54 communities in eastern Connecticut, but anyone in the state interested in being a foster parent in the new program or in existing programs may call the Norwich staff at 886-2641.
