905|1987\01\04|Bowen Plan Showed Concern for Age's Terrors; The 80 Percent Myth|To the Editor:  As one Medicare subscriber of many who might reply to ''Fighting Catastrophe for $4.92 a Month'' (editorial, Dec. 5), I view your interpretation of how Part B of Medicare works as simplistic.|To the Editor:  As one Medicare subscriber of many who might reply to ''Fighting Catastrophe for $4.92 a Month'' (editorial, Dec. 5), I view your interpretation of how Part B of Medicare works as simplistic. To the Editor:  As one Medicare subscriber of many who might reply to ''Fighting Catastrophe for $4.92 a Month'' (editorial, Dec. 5), I view your interpretation of how Part B of Medicare works as simplistic. Physicians in the New York area, and perhaps in all but remote regions, exercise their right, often justifiably, to charge patients more than the amounts recognized as reasonable by the Government. It is a myth that Medicare patients receive 80 percent of what they are charged or what they are entitled to, even after their deductible has been satisfied. Two random examples: * A physician's bill of $175, approved for $72.20 by Medicare (further reduced by 1 percent by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings bill), was reduced to 80 percent, or $57.76. Payment was $57.18. * A diagnostic X-ray was billed by the hospital at $55. Medicare's approved charge was $40, 80 percent of which is $32. The reimbursement check was slightly less, $31.68 (a consistent practice). Any attempt to challenge or receive clarification is impossible. After hours of dialing, a caller may congratulate himself on having reached someone - only to receive recorded instructions to wait for a staff member to be free and to have proper identification numbers available. This message is repeated several minutes. Then another recording states that all interviewers are too busy, and the caller is asked to phone again, and with that the caller is clicked off. The Bowen plan addresses itself to the increase of services to Medicare patients while the fee for each service is frozen. Perhaps an examination of the discrepancies between the charged fees and approved fees is more necessary.  ALAN BUXTON Hackensack, N.J., Dec. 8, 1986
