906|1987\01\04|Steroid Warning|To the Sports Editor:|To the Sports Editor: To the Sports Editor: The article concerning the perception among football fans of an increase in injuries in the National Football League (''Fans Perceive Rise in Injuries,'' The New York Times, Dec. 21, 1986) discusses drug use as an important problem. Fans and officials think, however, that ''the drug problem in football is no worse than in society in general.'' This may well be true of the addictive narcotic class of drug with which we are all familiar. However, there is a type of dangerous drug with which fans are less familiar, and for which the professional and elite amateur athlete is providing the role model. This is the anabolic steroid, the so-called ''muscle building'' or ''strength building'' drug. Steroid use started at the top of the athletic pyramid: the world-class athlete, the professional athlete, the competitive body builder. It is now reaching down to the lower-level athlete. We are seeing more college athletes being banned because of the detection of steroid use. Steroids continue to insidiously spread to other groups -to the high school athlete and to the recreational athlete, both male and female - in the mistaken belief that they are beneficial and harmless. There is very little scientific evidence to even suggest that anabolic steroids really do, in any way, increase strength, but there is abundant, irrefutable evidence to show that steroids can and do cause permanent and serious damage to those who use them. This is especially the case in the young, growing athlete and in the female athlete. Steroids may cause premature cessation of growth in the child; masculinization in the female; and sterility, liver disease and liver tumors and heart disease in all. The use of steroids must be reserved for treatment of illnesses for which they are medically indicated and in proper medically prescribed dosages. Athletic use is dangerous and is affecting more and more innocent, young athletes who believe that, unlike narcotics, steroids are healthy. The purpose of sport is to make healthy people healthier. This requires education, understanding and prevention. It is prevention rather than treatment of injury and illness that is the important function of sports medicine. MARK I. PITMAN, M.D. Chief of Sports Medicine Hospital for Joint Diseases New York
