911|1987\01\04|TROOPERS GET TEST OF STRESS|A TASK FORCE has spent $60,000 testing Connecticut state troopers for hypertension and stress-related diseases, and is now seeking $150,000 to develop a program to solve some of the problems it discovered.|A TASK FORCE has spent $60,000 testing Connecticut state troopers for hypertension and stress-related diseases, and is now seeking $150,000 to develop a program to solve some of the problems it discovered. A TASK FORCE has spent $60,000 testing Connecticut state troopers for hypertension and stress-related diseases, and is now seeking $150,000 to develop a program to solve some of the problems it discovered. ''This is the first time in the country that an entire department has been profiled,'' said the chairman of the task force, James M. Abbondanza. The study found that many officers have styles of life that can contribute to heart disease and other ailments, while more than 70 troopers were found to have illnesses in need of immediate attention. ''We've developed some good, hard data, and now we want to follow up on it,'' Mr. Abbondanza said. The follow-up, if the budget is approved, will include installing computerized health-testing and exercise equipment at each of the 17 state police barracks, Mr. Abbondanza said. ''Psychologically, there might not be many jobs tougher than being a cop,'' said a member of the task force, Sgt. Ronald Clark, who the commanding officer of the State Police employee assistance program. ''But we can do something about it, we can intervene, we can help,'' Sergeant Clark said. ''If we can intervene early enough, it's really life-saving.'' The stress management program also has the full support of the state police union, which has representatives on the task force, said the director of political action for the union, James E. Duffy. ''A program like this is a solution to the problems a lot of police forces have faced for a number of years,'' Mr. Duffy said.  The task force was established in 1984 as a result of negotiations between the union and management, which is trying to reduce the number of heart and hypertension claims by state police under state law. Union officials and administrators were named to the panel, and a neutral observer, Mr. Abbondanza, was named chairman. Mr. Abbondanza, an associate professor of psychology at Niagara County Community College in New York, has worked with police departments across the country on stress-related problems for more than a dozen years. Mr. Abbondanza said the typical case of ''burn out'' occurred an average of 11 years after an officer joined the force. Symptoms might include the use of excessive force or over-reaction to a situation by an officer with a good work record, problems with sleeping, marital discord, and physical complaints such as digestive disorders, he said. Suppressed stress, Mr. Abbondonza said, can lead to a variety of other problems, including diabetes, heart disease, hypertension and suicide. The stress management task force supervised the study of 120 health variables among the state's 957 troopers over the last several months, and the data are being analyzed by the Control Data Corporation of Minneapolis, Mr. Abbondanza said. Initial results showed 71 officers in immediate danger from diabetes, heart disease and other illnesses, Mr. Abbondanza said. Those troopers were notified and referred to private physicians. But the study uncovered a number of other alarming statistics, Mr. Abbondanza said, including that 170 officers, 19 percent of the sample, suffered a serious hypertension problem, and 191, or 21 percent, had high cholesterol levels. Many of the problems are aggravated by the way the officer live, Mr. Abbondanza said, because 30 officers, 3 percent, were heavy drinkers, 284, or 31 percent, were overweight, 137, 15 percent, were heavy smokers, and 162, or 18 percent, did not exercise enough. ''I think these results are generally reflective of the type of health risks that police officers are encountering around the country,'' Mr. Abbondanza said. But the problems go beyond styles of life, Mr. Abbondanza said. Troopers must routinely deal with problems such as child abuse, murder, drug addiction and other situations that bother them long after the workday is complete, and often lead to domestic problems. ''They face things every day that the average person might not have to face in a lifetime,'' Mr. Abbondanza said. ''They have to develop a sort of armor to it, and as they're developing that armor, they shut themselves off from their families and their own feelings.'' Sergeant Clark said that for the last 10 years, his unit had tried to help troopers through such stressful situations. An officer is routinely dispatched when a trooper kills or injures someone, or for incidents such as when a child is killed. ''We're not there to interfere, just to support the officer,'' Sergeant Clark said. That can often be a difficult job, he said. ''What can you do with a cop who sees a kid crushed by a 50-ton trailer-truck?'' he said. ''Everyone tells you as cop, you have to get used to those things,'' Sergeant Clark said. ''But I've never seen any human being who got used to seeing dead kids.'' Sergeant Clark's unit also encourages troopers to bring families to the training academy, a change from the traditional thinking that family and professional lives be kept separate. The equipment being sought to install in state police barracks would include instruments for testing blood pressure, weight, heart rate and other vital signs, as well as exercise equipment. There would be instruction in stress-reduction techniques such as muscle relaxation through bio-feedback. Each officer would have a computer disk that would track progress toward weight and health goals, Mr. Abbondanza said. And in two years another series of health tests would be done to determine the program's impact. Sergeant Clark said he would also like to see recruits educated about the dangers of stress, and how to avoid them. ''Police officers have to be educated about stress literally from the day they come on the force,'' Sergeant Clark said. ''If they don't know how to handle it, we're going to see -we're seeing now - some very serious ramifications.'' And Mr. Duffy, the police union official, said a change in the way troopers are rotated into different assignments might help relieve stress. Currently, he said, it is not uncommon for an officer to remain on the same assignment for more than a dozen years, even though state police are responsible for everything from inspection of carnival rides to fire investigations in Connecticut. ''To leave someone out on the highways for 10 years might not lead to a heart attack,'' Mr. Duffy said, ''but it's going to cause some type of problem, whether it's ulcers or hypertension or whatever.'' ''If someone isn't given an opportunity to change, to try new experiences, there is a tremendous stress factor,'' he said.
