913|1987\01\04|CONTROLS ON SWANS PROPOSED|THE state's swan population is growing at such a rate that the birds pose a danger to other wildlife, some biologists say. But recommendations that the swans be held in check by killing their embryos is being strongly resisted by other authorities, including the state's Commissioner of Environmental|THE state's swan population is growing at such a rate that the birds pose a danger to other wildlife, some biologists say. But recommendations that the swans be held in check by killing their embryos is being strongly resisted by other authorities, including the state's Commissioner of Environmental THE state's swan population is growing at such a rate that the birds pose a danger to other wildlife, some biologists say. But recommendations that the swans be held in check by killing their embryos is being strongly resisted by other authorities, including the state's Commissioner of Environmental Protection. The graceful white birds with curving necks and wing spans of up to six feet are very aggressive in protecting their nesting areas, to the point of driving off other waterfowl, fishermen and even local property owners, wildlife experts note. The problem is made worse, they say, by a population that has grown to 1,450 along the eastern shores of Connecticut and is spreading westward. ''They're beautiful, but they can be out of control,'' said Noble Proctor, a writer and lecturer on birds who teaches biology at Southern Connecticut State University. In a recent report, Gregory Chasko, a state biologist, recommended that the birds' population be reduced by shaking swan eggs to prevent their hatching and also by killing some swans. But Stanley J. Pac, Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, said he did not see a need for a control program, and added that he had received ''a tremendous outpouring of letters in opposition'' to swan-control proposals. Mr. Chasko's recommendations are being reviewed by state officials, the Sierra Club, the Connecticut Audubon Society, the New England office of the National Audubon Society, the Connecticut Water Fowlers Association and other conservation and sportmen's groups. Milan G. Bull, director of field studies and ornithology at the Fairfield Regional Center of the Connecticut Audubon Society, said he expected that the society would support Mr. Chasko's proposal to shake eggs because swans were competing for food with other birds, especially black ducks. However, he said, ''we would not support outright killing of swans.'' Dr. Proctor said that he would support both shaking eggs and killing some swans. ''Other species are suffering unjustly because of what people introduced,'' he said. Swans are not native to North America, but were brought from Europe to grace shoreside estates. Some escaped and are now wild, living along the Connecticut and Thames Rivers. The birds ''will defend their territory against people and other waterfowl,'' Mr. Chasko said, noting that he has seen swans attacking fishermen, boaters and bathers. It is distressing to fishermen, he said, to be kept away from their favorite spots and to waterside property owners to be kept from their own backyards. Mr. Pac acknowledged that the birds are ''quite possessive,'' but added that ''we haven't had untoward incidents.'' In his report, Mr. Chasko also noted that when large numbers of swans frequent a particular area, they foul the shore and water with their droppings. But Priscilla Feral, New England director of Friends of Animals, a national animal protection organization, said that the swan droppings ''enrich plant life.'' Ms. Feral also noted that figures from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service show that duck and geese populations in Connecticut have increased substantially in recent years, countering Mr. Chasko's claims that the swans are so aggressive they will chase away other waterfowl, and their numbers reduce available food. David Rosgen, field coordinator for the Connecticut Breeding Bird Atlas, said that during non-nesting seasons, swans may ''get along fine'' with other species, but that ''if swans don't let other species breed, we'll lose those species.'' Swans had driven several varieties of ducks from the Niantic River, he said. But swans' eating habits help keep excessive plant growth from clogging waterways and also free up plants so that other birds can reach them, Ms. Feral said. In Mr. Chasko's report, ''The Impact of Mute Swans on Water Fowl and Water Fowl Habitat,'' he recommended shaking eggs in all swan nests on state property and in those on private property at the request of the owners. Shaking the eggs kills the embryos inside, but leaves the eggs intact, so the swan continues to incubate them. If the eggs were destroyed, the swan would simply lay another batch. Mr. Chasko also recommended that swans causing problems, in areas where they are very numerous, for instance, be euthanized. He advised against legalizing the hunting of swans, even though hunting them would be ''the most cost-effective'' control technique, he wrote. Rhode Island has had an egg shaking program for several years, and it has ''held the population in check, but we still have growth,'' said Charles Allin, a biologist with the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management. The state does not have a policy of killing swans, he said. Rhode Island's swan population would be ''skyrocketing'' without egg shaking, he said, and he hoped Connecticut would adopt the practice, too. ''Part of our problem is, the influx of swans from Connecticut is tremendous,'' Mr. Allin said. William Mannetti, president of the New Haven-based Animal Rights Front, said he feared that a swan-control policy could lead to permitting the hunting of swans. ''There's a lot of pressure from the hunting community to increase game species,'' he said. ''Wildlife should be held in trust for all of us.'' He also questioned Mr. Chasko's findings on the numbers of swans in Connecticut and their impact on the environment. Ms. Feral said she too objected ''on moral and biological grounds to any plan to control or manage mute swans.'' People should leave swans alone, she said, and natural controls, including such predators as snapping turtles, would keep the population in check. Mr. Chasko wanted to protect ducks and geese from swans, she said, in order to provide ''target opportunities'' for hunters. Public hearings would be scheduled if the state decides to to adopt a swan control program. ''Somewhere in the future, if circumstances warrant it, it might be considered,'' Commissioner Pac said. ''But at this point, after reviewing the report, I don't see a need for it.''
