914|1987\01\04|3 HARTFORD HIGH SCHOOLS LIFT RESTRICTIONS ON FANS AT GAMES|STAN PIORKOWSKI, the varsity basketball coach at Hartford Public High School, can still recall looking around at one home game last season and seeing fewer than than 40 people in the stands.|STAN PIORKOWSKI, the varsity basketball coach at Hartford Public High School, can still recall looking around at one home game last season and seeing fewer than than 40 people in the stands. STAN PIORKOWSKI, the varsity basketball coach at Hartford Public High School, can still recall looking around at one home game last season and seeing fewer than than 40 people in the stands. ''I think there were 37, and that included members of our jayvee  [ junior varsity ]  team, which had played the first game,'' Mr. Piorkowski said. That was a far cry from crowds in the past, which averaged about 700 and ran as high as 1,800 for games against city rival, Weaver High. By comparison, crowds last season averaged about 115, Mr. Piorkowski said. Attendance also decreased sharply at home games for Weaver and the city's third public high school, Bulkeley High. In all three instances, the decline had nothing to do with the teams' records, since all three schools won more games than they lost. What led to the decrease was a ruling, put into effect shortly after the 1985-86 season began last December, that barred ''outsiders'' from attending home games at all three schools. That ruling was rescinded recently by the Hartford Superintendent of Schools, Hernan LaFontaine, in response to a recommendation that the general public again be admitted to basketball games but that more stringent crowd-control measures be taken. The recommendation was drawn up following a series of meetings this fall that involved Lou Bazzano, the coordinator of physical education and athletics for the three Hartford high schools; the principals of the three schools, faculty managers; representatives of the Hartford Police Department, and the schools' security administrator, Peter Roach. The policy banning the general public from high school games, believed to have been the first of its kind in the state, was imposed following an incident during a game on Dec. 16, 1985, between Weaver High and Windsor High School at the Weaver field house. Despite the presence of police and security officers, a number of skirmishes broke out in the stands several times during the game. On two occasions, hundreds of spectators ran onto the basketball court, forcing a halt to play. After the last interruption, Eddie Davis, the Weaver principal, ordered the field house cleared of all spectators, except those from Windsor. Mr. Davis said the disorders involved outsiders who made up a large segment of the crowd of about 800 spectators at the game. While there were no injuries, the principal said there were a number of angry confrontations that frightened some of the students in attendance. After that incident, the principals of the three schools met with other school officials, after which the ban was imposed. Although similar bans have been imposed in New York and Philadelphia, no one could recall a similar action ever having been taken in Connecticut. In an effort to avoid disorders, Hartford high school officials have scheduled City Series games between the three high schools in the afternoon for several years. And as a precaution, Weaver High, the site of a number of disturbances over the years, has played all of its home games in the afternoon - with the varsity games starting at 4:30 P.M. - for about a decade. ''We always regarded the ban as a temporary measure,'' Mr. Bazzano said. ''We never expected it to be permanent. But we have tightened controls and anyone who does not abide by our rules will be denied the privilege of attending the games, whether it's a student or an outsider.'' As part of an increased security operation, which took effect when the current season began in mid-December, at least two city police officers are assigned to each home game, along with regular school security officers. In addition, at Weaver High a number of parents and alumni have signed up to oversee crowd behavior while wearing identifying black armbands. Crowds during the opening home game at all three schools were well-behaved and attendance was up considerably from last season, when the ban was in effect. For example, about 600 spectators attended Hartford Public's opening game against South Windsor High; that crowd was roughly six times larger than the average gathering at Hartford Public's home games during the 1985-86 season. ''What we've mainly got to watch out for are outsiders bent on causing trouble,'' Mr. Bazzano said. ''And we're going to be on our toes.'' Joe DiChiara, the varsity basketball coach at Bulkeley, said there had been no problems at his school in the past. ''We've had some isolated fights in the stands, but you'll find that anywhere, not just at an inner-city school.'' Crowds at Bulkeley games, which usually average about 500, averaged slightly less than 100 last season, Mr. DiChiara said, even though the team won the Central Connecticut Conference South title. ''It was weird,'' the coach said. ''If anyone raised their voice during a game, you could hear it all over the gym. There's no doubt that the kids missed the crowds, but they still worked hard.'' Mr. Piorkowski, the coach at Hartford Public, said the much smaller crowds appeared to have had an effect on his players, even though the team finished with a 14-6 record. ''Several players quit the team and some of the kids seemed to be uninspired,'' he said. ''But I don't know whether there was a direct correlation between what happened and the small crowds. I do know, though, that the season was one of the low ebbs of my career.'' Both Mr. DiChiara and Mr. Piorkowski said that student attendance at games also declined. ''A lot of kids lost their I.D. cards and wouldn't bother to get new ones, and so they stopped going to the games,'' Mr. Piorkowski said. Technically, only students producing identification cards, parents of players, coaches, college scouts and sportswriters were admitted to the games last season. But at times the rules were bent. ''As a rule, anyone who appeared to be sober or said, 'I'm an alumnus' was let in at our home games,'' Mr. Piorkowski said. All three coaches said that their players appeared to have been affected to some degree at playing in what at times were near-empty gymnasiums. ''It took some adjustment,'' said Dwight Tolliver, the coach at Weaver High. ''But after a while, the kids got used to playing with hardly anyone around.'' Crowds at Weaver home games last season averaged around 200, about one-third of what the team usually draws, Mr. Tolliver said. Despite the relatively small turnouts, the Weaver cagers had an outstanding season, posting a 19-5 record and losing in the quarterfinals of the state tournament by one point to Hillhouse High of New Haven, the eventual state champion in the large-school division. ''Ninety percent of the time the trouble we had at home games was caused by outsiders,'' Mr. Tolliver said. ''But when there were altercations between students, strangely enough, it usually involved girl students, usually in the City Series games.'' All three coaches said they felt that last season's ban on outsiders could prove salutary in the long run. ''I think it's going to help at all three schools,'' Mr. DiChiara, the Bulkeley coach, said. ''We've made it clear that we're not going to take any junk and that if outsiders want to come to the games, they're going to have to behave.''
