915|1987\01\04|MAYOR UPSET AT HAVING DOG WITH A PAST|SHERRY WILLIAMSON, the executive assistant to Stamford Mayor Thom Serrani, refers to it as ''Doggiegate,'' as do some members of the Stamford Police Department.|SHERRY WILLIAMSON, the executive assistant to Stamford Mayor Thom Serrani, refers to it as ''Doggiegate,'' as do some members of the Stamford Police Department. SHERRY WILLIAMSON, the executive assistant to Stamford Mayor Thom Serrani, refers to it as ''Doggiegate,'' as do some members of the Stamford Police Department. While it is hardly a high-priority item, the police in Stamford, along with the Mayor's office, are trying to find out why no one told Mr. Serrani that a mixed-breed collie he adopted from the city dog pound on Dec. 23, and subsequently named Buddy, had bitten a 14-year-old girl on Dec. 2. There was a long-standing animosity between the Mayor and the dog warden, Beverly Bowler. Miss Bowler conceded in an interview that she might have been remiss in not telling Mr. Serrani that he was taking home a dog that had bitten someone. ''The Mayor has treated our office with contempt for three years, and maybe that was a factor in my not telling him,'' said Miss Bowler who officially stepped down as the dog warden last week. ''I probably should have told him that the dog had bitten the girl, but I didn't think it was important because the dog is not vicious. But I take responsibility for not doing so.'' Miss Bowler announced her resignation a month ago, and has insisted it was unrelated to the incident. The Mayor's adoption of the dog came about after the Police Department's liaison with the pound, Patrolman Daniel Vaccaro, ordered Miss Bowler and her three assistants to begin killing dogs because of overcrowded conditions. After countermanding Patrolman Vaccaro's order, Mr. Serrani announced that he planned to go to the pound to adopt a dog. The Mayor then toured the pound on Dec. 12 with his wife, Beth, and Gloria Scheuer, an official of Adopt-A-Dog, a nonprofit dog adoption service staffed by volunteers that is based in Greenwich. While at the pound, the Mayor and his wife took a fancy to the mixed-breed collie, which had been at the Magee Avenue site since biting the girl in a schoolyard in the Shippan section of town. ''Both Mr. Serrani and his wife walked and played with the dog, which is about 4 years old, and it seemed extremely friendly,'' Mrs. Scheuer said. ''When we asked one of the dog wardens about it, she said it was a lovable, friendly dog.'' ''But no one ever told us that the dog had bitten anyone or had been placed in quarantine, as biters are supposed to be for between 14 and 16 days,'' she said. ''If they had, we would have gone on to another dog.'' Mrs. Scheuer said that when she and the Serranis visited the pound, there were about 60 dogs, about double the acceptable capacity. ''The Stamford pound has always been very crowded,'' she said. Miss Bowler, the former dog warden, agreed. ''We've complained about conditions for years and have asked the city to expand the facilities, but they've ignored us.'' she said. But Mrs. Williamson, the Mayor's aide, said that $96,460 that had been allocated to the dog warden's office in the 1983-84 capital budget had never been used. ''The money is still sitting there and available,'' she said. Asked why the money had not been used, Miss Bowler said it was insufficient for expansion. ''We needed a lot more, and asked for another $155,000 in 1985, so that we could double the pound, but we never got it,'' she said. Miss Bowler, who was the dog warden for five years, said she thought her less-than-amicable relationship with Mr. Serrani stemmed from a series of incidents involving a dog he had owned before he became mayor. ''We got quite a few complaints from neighbors complaining about his dog, which was always running loose, and we got after him,'' Miss Bowler said. ''At the time, he was a state senator, but I didn't know him from Adam. I think maybe he hasn't forgotten about that.'' In response, Mrs. Williamson said, ''That's ludicrous, I'm certain that never happened.'' Deputy Police Chief John Moriarty, whose office has jurisdiction over the pound, said Mr. Serrani had commissioned a designer to see whether the pound can be expanded. ''Even though it's usually overcrowded, dogs usually aren't put to sleep unless they've been grievously injured or are seriously ill with no prognosis for recovery,'' he said. As it was, Chief Moriarty said, the order to do away with some dogs at the pound ''turned a negative into a positive'' once the public became aware of the situation. According to Mrs. Scheuer, about 18 dogs were adopted within a few weeks after Patrolman Vaccaro issued his order. Mayor Serrani was on vacation last week and unavailable for comment. But Mrs. Williamson, his executive aide, said he was ''disturbed that proper procedures had not been followed'' - meaning that the Mayor had not been told the dog he was adopting had bitten someone. ''The Mayor is a dog lover and his visit to the pound turned out to be a propitious one,'' Mrs. Williamson said. ''It's a wonderful dog, friendly and housebroken, and the Mayor and Mrs. Serrani are very happy with it.'' So much so, the Mayor's aide said, that they took the dog on vacation with them. As for Miss Bowler, she said she was moving to Schoharie, in upstate New York, to establish a house-cleaning service. ''I lost interest in the dog warden's job, and I finally just gave up,'' she said. ''Now, I want to get as far away from dogs as I can - at least for a while.''
