916|1987\01\04|WORRIED PARENTS SEEK SAFE ACTIVITIES FOR TEEN-AGERS|THE fear of teen-age drug and alcohol abuse is motivating parents to help their youngsters find safer social pursuits. Activity centers for teen-agers, pledges by parents to supervise at-home parties, greater support by parents for the athletic endeavors of their children and setting aside an area in the home where young people can entertain their friends are some of the avenues being tried around the state.|THE fear of teen-age drug and alcohol abuse is motivating parents to help their youngsters find safer social pursuits. Activity centers for teen-agers, pledges by parents to supervise at-home parties, greater support by parents for the athletic endeavors of their children and setting aside an area in the home where young people can entertain their friends are some of the avenues being tried around the state. THE fear of teen-age drug and alcohol abuse is motivating parents to help their youngsters find safer social pursuits. Activity centers for teen-agers, pledges by parents to supervise at-home parties, greater support by parents for the athletic endeavors of their children and setting aside an area in the home where young people can entertain their friends are some of the avenues being tried around the state. In addition to alcohol and drug abuse, parents say they worry about their children contacting diseases such as herpes and AIDS from casual sexual encounters. They also are concerned about their children getting involved in street violence, especially in the larger cities. The focus is on social alternatives, rather than discipline, since restrictions are virtually impossible to uphold in a contemporary home, parents maintain. ''Parents don't have much power anymore,'' conceded Toby Jesurum of Stamford, who has a 17-year-old daughter, Esther. ''If they take away the use of the car, the kids will just ride in someone else's for a few weeks. If they take away pocket money, the kids can always make it up by taking jobs like baby-sitting. And if you just tyrannize your child into submission, you may end up with a serious personality problem. The child never grows up.'' Others maintain that tighter controls only add to the overall sense of confrontation and rebellion that traditionally exists during the teen- age years. ''I've found that restrictions like curfews create nothing but trouble,'' said Mary Lou Cantrell, president of the Parent-Teacher Association at New Canaan High School and the mother of five children. ''They become a bone of contention. They actually encourage a child to stay out late just to use up the time.'' Teen-agers say that potentially dangerous situations often erupt because of pent-up frustrations over lack of options, especially in smaller communities. The problem is compounded, they add, now that teen-agers are excluded by law from bars. Even acceptable activities, such as an evening at an skating rink, is becoming a rarity because escalating liability insurance is forcing many rinks to close. ''We have no McDonald's in town, no pizza place, not even an arcade,'' said Tom Maglisceau, 18, a senior at New Canaan High School. ''And most of us don't have the gas or the money to go a distance.'' So many of his friends, he said, end up spending an evening gathered at a parking lot behind a gas station, drinking or taking drugs for lack of other entertainment. Weston became one of the first of the smaller towns in the area to organize a teen center. Known as Weston's Union, it was established in 1982 by a group of parents to offset their children's constant complaint about ''nothing to do.'' The experience of the organizers is now providing an important lesson for other towns. The center, in a building donated by the town's Board of Education, caters to youngsters from the 9th through the 12th grade. Operating expenses are approximately $20,000 a year, most of which comes from membership fees of $15 a person per semester, $5 door charges for nonmembers, parent donations and profits from the snack bar, said the volunteer director, Diane Lederer. The center is normally open on Friday and Saturday nights. The center had no problem attracting youngsters during the first year of operation, when it was considered a novelty, Mrs. Lederer said. But the regular program of dancing and movies soon began to loose its appeal, particularly as no liquor was served. To rekindle interest the executive board was expanded last year to include 30 students as well the supervising adults. ''The students helped spread the word and brought around friends,'' she said, adding that the teen-agers are also much more in tune with what their peers want from a social center. The new board has also decided to organize a special event at least once a month this winter: Plans include more live band concerts and disk jockeys, a talent show, an outdoor block party during warmer weather and an ice-cream soda night. New Canaan opened a youth center based on the Weston model a year ago at the local Y.M.C.A. One of the concerns, said Edwin Maclisceau, the vice president, was that it would end up being mostly 9th and 10th graders who would use it, not the older students who had cars. But the organizers have found, he said, that if they can make the atmosphere and the programs sufficiently appealing - with pool tables, conversation areas, live bands and special events, the students will keep coming back. ''We've had a very strong showing by the older kids,'' he said. ''They are hanging in there.'' After polling 4,000 youngsters in the 7th to 12th grades and finding that 86 percent were eager for the opportunity, Greenwich now plans to offer something similar within a year or two. Getting parents to pledge as a group not to allow unsupervised parties in their homes is another idea gaining ground. This way, teen-agers cannot play one set of parents against another by insisting that ''nobody else does that.'' The idea is known as ''Safe Homes.'' Greens Farms Academy in Wesport has been doing this now for two years. Nan Ruben, one of the parent volunteer organizers, said they have managed to get about 150 parents of children from grades 5 to 12 to agree to sign the pledge. It is mailed to all parents of children in the school, and repeated each September. Mr. Maclisceau of New Canaan said more parents should take a greater interest in the athletic interests of their youngsters. Often the teen-agers become discouraged and drop out too swiftly, he said, due to a temporary setback, such as not making a particular team, or lack of enthusiasm about a particular achievement by a parent. Athletics, he said, are a particularly positive leisure-time acitivity. Individually, parents are adding other initiatives. For instance, Ellen and Alfred Camhi of Stamford have been encouraging their son, Glen, 17, to bring friends back to the house by making sure their large basement room is attractive to youngsters. The room has been carpeted, decorated with streamers and furnished with a Ping-Pong table, pool table and stereo. Mrs. Camhi provides snacks and soda. ''The key is wanting those friends in the house,'' she said. ''Too many parents complain about the noise and the mess. But it's better to have them hanging out in the house than on the street.'' No alcohol or drugs are allowed. But this does not seem to be a deterrent, said Glen. ''If that's what they want, they have to find it someplace else,'' he said. ''Most of us just want somewhere to meet. I know because often I get calls from kids asking to come over even when I'm not planning to invite anyone.''
