917|1987\01\04|LITCHFIELD COUNTY TACKLES ITS HOUSING WOES|LITCHFIELD COUNTY, increasing known as a place for wealthy weekend residents, is becoming more and more strained to provide housing for its low- and moderate-income residents, many of whom grew up in the county but can no longer afford to live there.|LITCHFIELD COUNTY, increasing known as a place for wealthy weekend residents, is becoming more and more strained to provide housing for its low- and moderate-income residents, many of whom grew up in the county but can no longer afford to live there. LITCHFIELD COUNTY, increasing known as a place for wealthy weekend residents, is becoming more and more strained to provide housing for its low- and moderate-income residents, many of whom grew up in the county but can no longer afford to live there. The lack of affordable housing ranges from renters who cannot find apartments for under $500 to first-time homebuyers who look in vain to find something they can afford in the region. And it includes elderly people who would like to sell their homes and move into congregate housing, and single mothers who search for apartments with reasonable rents where their children will be welcome. Community groups have banded together to tackle the problem, and a few have been successful in getting some affordable housing built. But they acknowledge that they have a long way to go in dealing with a problem that one local leader described as ''never going to go away.'' Compounding the problem is a negative image of affordable housing. There have been protests in some areas where such projects have been proposed. ''It's a ticklish problem,'' said William A. Wilbur, the First Selectman in Sharon, where a panel is studying how the town could build such housing. ''A lot of people are afraid when you talk about low-income housing that you are segregating a certain class of people. We don't want to build something and put a 'low-income housing' stigma on it. We want this to be a fully acceptable part of the town.'' A recent survey ranked affordable housing second only to transportation among the needs of residents of New Milford and the nearby communities of Litchfield, Bantam, Morris and Goshen. ''We don't have people sleeping in doorways,'' said William J. Marchand, president of the United Way of Torrington, which helped sponsor the survey. ''It's a quiet problem.'' The survey showed that the price of an average home in Litchfield County had climbed from $84,800 in 1984 to $106,400 in 1985. Although the survey did not include rental housing, this cost has also risen, Mr. Marchand said, as as the rental stock became scarcer. For example, in downtown Torrington, he noted, many large houses have been converted into professional offices. The need for affordable housing throughout the county is called ''critical'' by Kevin Brophy, supervising attorney for Connecticut Legal Services, based in Torrington. ''I get 40 to 60 calls a month about housing and most of that is from people having problems paying rent,'' Mr. Brophy said.  The problem has drawn concern from town officials, members of the clergy, social service professionals and business people. Much of the county is rural and has long suffered from a lack of rental housing, they point out, but the situation worsened when land values began to spiral upwards, making all forms of real estate, including apartments, increasingly expensive. In New Milford a newly formed group, the New Milford Affordable Housing Corporation, is seeking solutions, said Rabbi Norman Koch, its president. But since the problem affects a range of people, from those who are classified as poor to those of higher incomes who want to purchase homes, the group is looking at both the cost of rental apartments, which have risen to more than $400 a month, and the cost of single-family houses, which now sell for $200,000 to $300,000 ''with no end to the boom in sight,'' Rabbi Koch said. ''This is a long-term problem,'' he said. ''It's not the kind of thing where you could build a housing project and the problem would be solved. The problem is not going to go away.'' One aspect of the group's work will be in the area of public relations, to persuade other townspeople that affordable housing is a benefit to the community. When the housing corporation started looking into building a 30- to 40-unit low-income complex on a town-owned parcel of land, ''the next thing you knew, we had a neighborhood association formed to stop construction,'' Rabbi Koch said. ''Construction? We had not even decided on the project; we were just looking into whether it was feasible. But people got up in arms.'' ''Maybe I'm naive and wide-eyed, but I'm an optimist who thinks you can build nice complexes,'' he said. ''People tend to throw up images of projects and feel that low-income means slums. I, for one, do not believe that's true.'' The New Milford group is a varied lot, ranging from Patricia Purdy, the town's director of social services, to John Harker, the mill manager of Kimberly Clark, a manufacturer of household products that is a major area employer. Ms. Purdy said she sees a large number of clients, many of them single women with children, who cannot afford adequate housing. ''Many of our apartments have been converted to condominiums or, if there are apartments, the demand is so high that rentals, which used to go for $250, are now $400 to $500, and pay has not escalated to that extent,'' she said. As a result, many single mothers are crowding into apartments with friends or family members. They include women who have lived in New Milford all their lives, as well as those who married here but are now divorced. Because of the housing situation, some may be forced to move from New Milford. Ms. Purdy does not believe this will benefit the community. ''If you are going to have a good, healthy community you need to have people of all incomes and backgrounds,'' she said. ''They say America is a melting pot. I saw that when I came to New Milford 25 years ago. I saw a lot of people who were immigrants, a lot of blue-collar people and a lot of professionals. There was real mix. I think we're losing that now.'' Among Ms. Purdy's clients is Sherry Smart, age 20, who, with her 4-month-old daughter, lives with her mother. Both she and her mother would like their own apartments, but cannot find affordable ones. ''I've been looking for about a year,'' Ms. Smart said. ''I've looked in newspapers, I've looked all over. I'll have to stay right where I am until I find something.'' In hunting for an apartment, Beverly Nickerson, 31, finds, over and over, ''either they want too much money, or they don't want kids.'' Mrs. Nickerson, who is divorced, shares living quarters with her four children, her mother and two of her sisters and their children. ''Apartment hunting is terrible,'' she said. ''I need three bedrooms because of the kids. I started looking two years ago and I still haven't found anything. You can get rents if you want to move to Danbury but I don't want to. I've lived here all my life.'' Robin Glode, 25, who works as a secretary in Danbury, lived in a trailer with her five children until the trailer was sold. She and her husband, Michael, ''could pay about $600 a month, but rents are about $850 and they don't want kids,'' she said. People like Mrs. Glode worry Mr. Harker, who fears that New Milford's pool of employees will shrink if workers cannot find affordable housing. Kimberly Clark, which employs about 1,250 people, is concerned because it wants to be able to transfer employees from its Middle West plants to New Milford. But single-family houses here cost far more than they do in Wisconsin, where most of the company's employees work, so such transfers are becoming more difficult, Mr. Harker said. Salisbury, Sharon and Cornwall are also facing housing difficulties, officials there say. But in Salisbury, one complex is closeto construction, and town officials are looking at the possibility of another. The first project got under way about two years ago, when a group of townspeople became concerned about the lack of affordable housing in their rural community. They formed the Salisbury Housing Committee Inc., which is about to undertake the construction of Sarum Village, a 16-unit apartment complex that will be open to families earning less than $23,500 annually. The town's Planning and Zoning Committee approved it last month, and the group has applied for a $702,151 low-interest loan from the Farmers Home Administration, which is expected to be approved soon, said Pauline Galbreath, a loan technician with the agency. The State Bond Commission has approved a grant of $217,526 to help with site improvements, said Richard Cofrancesco of the State Department of Housing. The decision to build the housing came about because ''there was a broad consensus in town that since property values were going up so astronomically, the town would lose a certain viability if young people couldn't find housing,'' said Edward McDonald, vice president of the Planning and Zoning Committee. ''The town had been a working community in the past, but what with the whittling away of the dairy farms and more and more weekenders coming here, the complexion of the town had changed,'' he said. ''Our feeling was we wanted to see people living here who couldn't afford to do it'' on their own. Sarum Village will be located on about eight acres of land in the center of town. There already is a waiting list for the units, Mr. McDonald said. Salisbury is looking at other possibilities as well, said First Selectman Charlotte H. Reid, among them a 14-acre tract donated to the town and now part of a 36-acre park. Mrs. Reid said she would like to see housing there that could accommodate first-time home-buyers. ''I'm concerned that young couples are being priced out of the market,'' she said. Cornwall formed a panel several months ago to study the housing issue ''and raise all the problems, which is very easy to do,'' said First Selectman Patsy Van Doren. That group has formed a nonprofit corporation that would enable it to build housing itself. The Rev. Peter Hammond, pastor at the First Church of Christ and a member of the study panel, found there were three specific problem areas in Cornwall: the high price of homes, the lack of low-income housing and the lack of housing for the elderly. A survey in Cornwall showed that, over the past year, the average sale price of a house was $200,000, Mr. Hammond said. Such prices are unattainable for persons with moderate means, ''even those with moderate incomes of up to $30,000, so there is a very strong demand in Cornwall for that kind of housing,'' he said. While Cornwall ''does not have a large number of people in need of low-income housing,'' he said, ''we do have some, and where there is a need for it, it is a very significant need.'' The problem with the elderly ''is not necessarily a function of income,'' Mr. Hammond said. ''There are many people living here who would like to sell their big old boats of houses and live in a congregate situation.'' At present, the group will probably focus on moderate-income housing, ''but we don't want to lose sight of the other needs,'' he said. In Sharon, a new study panel has been charged with giving town officials ''a definite course of action,'' said Mr. Wilbur, the First Selectman. The need for affordable housing became an issue in Sharon last fall, when some farm hands were faced with homelessness when a farm went out of business, said the Rev. Phil West, pastor at the Sharon United Methodist Church. Since then, an agreement has been worked out that will enable the workers to live on the farm until June, but the situation demonstrated the lack of affordable housing in Sharon, he said. ''I came here from New York City in 1975 and I've watched the same kind of gentrification in Sharon that I saw in Brooklyn Heights,'' Mr. West said. ''I've seen houses owned by a widow bought and resold for two and three times the price. The effect is to see famlies who have been part of the community for years forced to move away.'' As in other Litchfield County communities, some of the newcomers are people who work in New York City during the week, and commute to this region to enjoy weekend homes. The housing demand from this group is partly responsible for pricing out others, Mr. West said. ''I'm not critical of the weekenders, but they're not coming here to man the volunteer fire department,'' he said. And while Litchfield County has the reputation of being affluent, there is poverty here, Mr. West said, ''although it tends to be invisible or not highly visible. These are small houses on back roads.'' But recognizing a problem and taking action to solve it are two different things, Mr. Wilbur said.The town has convened boards to study the housing problem twice before, he said. Two years ago, a study board recommended easing zoning restrictions so that large homes could be made into several apartments. But because of the high cost of real estate, the new apartments ended up being very expensive, he said.
