918|1987\01\04|Excuses Go High Tech|TEACHERS have been noticing that the current generation of students is remarkably creative in devising excuses for absences, tardiness and missed work.|TEACHERS have been noticing that the current generation of students is remarkably creative in devising excuses for absences, tardiness and missed work. TEACHERS have been noticing that the current generation of students is remarkably creative in devising excuses for absences, tardiness and missed work. The increasing presence of computers in schools, for example, has given students several new reasons to cite for not finishing work. ''The computer has become the most fertile field for excuse-making,'' observes Jane Mallison, chairman of the English department at the Trinity School on Manhattan's Upper West Side. '' 'The printer broke.' 'I pushed the wrong button and erased the whole thing.' 'We had a blackout.' Those are the most common excuses now.'' Many students still rely on that traditional favorite, the household pet. Says Edward F. Duncanson, a science teacher at Crispell Middle School in Pine Bush, N.Y., ''I just had a note from a student's mother saying the dog ate his homework.'' Other children, however, perhaps tired of such cliches, have invented fantastic tales. LeRoy E. Hay of Manchester High School in Manchester, Conn., reports his favorite such sequence: A student told his teacher that he was making his way to school along a quiet suburban road when he was suddenly blinded by a flash of bright light. When the boy regained his sight he was stunned to behold a flying saucer. Some creatures got out of the glowing space machine and, in perfect English, asked him what he was doing. When the student explained that he was on his way to school, the space creatures left him unharmed, but they took his homework. ''They said they were doing a study of human education and wanted my homework as a sample,'' the student said. Students from big cities have their own variation on the flying-saucer theme: A student is making his way to school when he is confronted by street toughs. In imperfect English, they ask the boy what he is doing. When the student explains that he is going to school, the muggers leave him unharmed. But - you guessed it - they take his homework. Teen-agers have created a cult hero out of the title character of the movie ''Ferris Bueller's Day Off.'' Ferris not only dreams up extraordinary excuses, but usually gets away with them. But how well do excuses really work? Teachers want to believe their students, but they also do not want to be thought of as pushovers. ''Most of the time it depends on the student,'' Dr. Hay says. ''If you get one from a student who never makes an excuse, then you are more likely to believe him. You can buy anything once. But there are some students you just know are making it up. You don't buy anything from them.''  BLACKBOARD NOTES
