919|1987\01\04|SOME FILMS ARE FINDING SAINTS AS COMPELLING AS SINNERS|Hollywood has never had much faith in religion.|Hollywood has never had much faith in religion. Hollywood has never had much faith in religion. A religious theme might be used as the pretext for a costume spectacle or a lighthearted comedy, but a truly religious story, one that examined the struggle of faith or the search for meaning in an often random, indifferent universe, was usually shunned. Sermons, Hollywood seemed to be saying, are meant for the pulpit, not the screen. It comes as something of a surprise, therefore, that this season four films have been released that deal with explicitly religious themes or plots. ''In general, it's the absence of religion in film that disturbs me,'' says the Rev. Robert Lauder, an associate professor of philosophy at St. John's University who writes about film. ''That four should appear within a month or two is very rare.'' ''Therese'' is a biographical film of an intense young French girl who becomes a Carmelite nun and eventually a saint. ''The Mission'' is the story of Jesuit missionaries who attempt to defend their jungle outpost and its Indian adherents against colonial forces and an equivocal church hierarchy seeking to shut it down. ''The Name of the Rose,'' is a detective tale of monks in a 14th-century Italian abbey trying to solve a murder. ''The Sacrifice'' is a film by the Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky, who died last week, about a man who offers himself to God as a sacrifice to save the world from nuclear annihilation. It only takes some generosity to include, among such recent films, the documentary ''Mother Teresa,'' about the work of the Nobel Peace Prize-winning nun. And at least one more religious film is in the offing. Woody Allen, many of whose films have had strong religious undercurrents, began shooting at the end of October on a serious drama. One of its motifs, he said in an interview, is ''the conflict between the scientific view of the meaning of the universe and the religious, unthinking faith view.'' It would probably be giving too much credit to the random forces that operate in the film industry to say Hollywood and foreign film makers have rediscovered religion. Nevertheless, several observers of the film industry believe that the confluence of so many new films about religion - a subject that has historically fallen flat at the box office - is probably tied to a resurgence in religious interest in this decade. Much of this resurgence, a recent study by the nondenominational Hartford Seminary showed, is the result of baby boomers returning to churches and synagogues as they enter middle age, raise families and con-Continued on page 00 front questions about life, death and meaning that have confronted every generation. ''I think not only in this country but elsewhere, people are looking to traditional standards of morality,'' said Annette Michelson, a professor of cinema studies at New York University and editor of the film magazine October. ''This dictates literary judgments as well as modes of behavior.'' Roland Joffe, director of ''The Mission,'' says that there come moments in ''this strange industrial and artistic world of film'' when ''ideas are current and felt to be current,'' and we're at ''the bulge of that surf'' with religion. ''People are asking questions about spirituality, about whether a purely material view of the world is sufficient,'' he said. ''Are we passing on an ethical structure to our kids, and if we've abandoned that, have we done them a disservice?'' The fact is that Hollywood and -with some notable exceptions - most foreign directors have not traditionally been drawn to religion as a major theme unless it could serve such a commercially defensible end as a vehicle for lush scenery, lavish costumes and dazzling special effects. ''If you take religion seriously, you have to step on people's toes, and if you step on people's toes, Hollywood doesn't want it,'' said Michael Gallagher, who for 10 years was a film critic for the National Catholic News Service. That attitude has remained fairly constant over the decades, according to Father Lauder. ''There are isolated snatches where they have treated religion more seriously, where they do seem to be going for something deeper, but it has not changed significantly,'' he said, One director who has consistently struggled with religious themes is Mr. Allen. He has woven the subject through films as varied as ''Love and Death,'' ''Stardust Memories,'' his most recent ''Hannah and Her Sisters'' and even, he says, ''The Purple Rose of Cairo.'' Because Mr. Allen tends to make highly personal films, he can explore his particular interests, and the subject that is most important to him, he said, is the religious groping for faith and meaning, a theme, he says, that is far more compelling than politics and psychology. ''That to me is the only significant struggle,'' he said. ''Until you come to terms with that, everything else is putting Band-Aids on something.'' ''Everything,'' he continued, ''is based on that enormous fear and anxiety that human beings deal with, that sense of total bewilderment and total anxiety about mortality.'' Mr. Allen, who was raised in what he described as a moderately religious Jewish family, says he has no respect for conventional religions. Some of that attitude was evident in the satire of his last film, ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' where the character played by Mr. Allen goes on a spiritual search and comes home with a slew of religious novelty items, including a gaudy holographic picture of Jesus, whose eyes shift expressions from saintly to sad. ''But I do identify completely with individual human beings who have honest theological struggles,'' he said. ''Comedy can treat any subject and can treat religion because the suffering that one goes through in religious doubts and ambivalence is perfect meat for comedians.'' What is or is not a religious film is a difficult matter to define. But Hollywood's treatment of religion seems to fall roughly into three categories. A religious theme is often used as the vehicle for a romantic or historical epic - ''The Robe,'' ''The Ten Commandments,'' ''King of Kings.'' In some of these films, action and spectacle are what the film is really about; some, such as ''Becket'' or ''A Man for All Seasons,'' contain considerable religious food for thought. ''The Mission'' might be this year's best example of the epic religous film that wrestles with serious and contemporary theological themes. Written by Robert Bolt, who also wrote both the stage and screen versions of ''A Man for All Seasons,'' the movie considers whether oppression should be fought with weapons or with the power of goodness and love; how does one give one's life meaning and what is the appropriate role of the church in temporal affairs. Still, the film spends much of its energy on compelling and dramatic action - perilous climbs up a breathtaking waterfall and intricately choreographed scenes of fighting. ''The nature of film is to dramatize conflict,'' Mr. Joffe said, explaining why he felt it was important to keep theological discussions as spare as possible. ''The purpose of the movie is to make people feel, and it is in that feeling that thought is opened up.'' A second category might embrace those films where religious figures are the basis for a story, sometimes warm, sometimes somber, sometimes simply a rousing adventure. Films like ''Going My Way,'' or ''The Bells of St. Mary's'' may actually say little about religion and more about such shared American values as optimism and communal responsibility. ''Going My Way,'' where Bing Crosby plays a Roman Catholic priest, is, according to Father Lauder, a delightful picture, but not really a religious one, and Bing Crosby could as well have been a doctor. Similarly, ''The Name of the Rose'' is essentially a detective story in religious garb. Finally, there are films that on the surface are not religious at all, but touch on themes that are profoundly religious. ''Tender Mercies,'' ''Chariots of Fire,'' and even ''On the Waterfront'' are cited by Father Lauder and others as examples of Hollywood's religious sensibility at its best. ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' where the character played by Mr. Allen comes, after much inner turmoil, to the conclusion that a world that can produce the Marx Brothers is one worth living in, would be last year's contender for that category. ''Chariots of Fire'' is ostensibly about a battle for glory between two English sprinters, but according to Father Lauder, it is ''a great religious film.'' One sprinter is a Scottish minister who runs because he feels the pleasure of God in his swiftness. The other is a Jewish student at Cambridge who runs because he must show a bigoted world that he can perform as well as anyone. Both sprinters win their races, but while the minister savors the gratification of his cheering friends, the other runner, at the film's end, seems ambivalent about his triumph. The Scottish minister also refuses to race on Sunday - despite appeals by the king -because it is his sabbath. He thereby wins an inner victory. A fourth category - the film that genuinely grapples with religious questions - is one Hollywood seems to have avoided. One must go abroad, to the works of such directors as Fellini and, most notably, Ingmar Bergman, to find such films. Starting with ''The Seventh Seal'' in 1956, and continuing through such films as ''Through a Glass Darkly,'' and ''Cries and Whispers,'' the Swedish director has replayed one theme, according to Father Lauder. ''Simply stated that theme is the struggle of human beings to communicate love in a world in which God is silent,'' Father Lauder has written. ''The meaning and value of that struggle are made precarious for Mr. Bergman by the presence of death.'' ''When we are in Mr. Bergman's world,'' he notes, ''the presence of God - or the presence of God's absence - is overpowering.'' Some of the critics who reviewed Mr. Tarkovksy's film, ''The Sacrifice,'' which was made in Sweden, noted the Bergmanesque qualities in its themes and its use of symbolism. Frantisek Daniel, dean of the School of Cinema and Television at the University of Southern California, says Hollywood does not make serious religious films because producers don't think such films are what the audience wants. ''You have to ask the producer and the audience,'' he said. ''Do they want, do they need pictures that would help to clarify these basic questions: where are we, what are we doing here, why do we live, whom do we respond to, what is human conscience all about?'' ''Hollywood deals more with the myth than with the substance of religion,'' he said. ''You have this paradox, which is connected with the medium. If there is a mass medium, then people want to see stories. If the stories were to elucidate essential questions of human existence, if they are attractive enough, you can find producers who will put money into it. But when it is disturbing, when it makes people aware of those bothering questions, then people shy off. They don't want to deal with it.'' Mr. Joffe recalls that when he first tried to interest backers in ''The Mission,'' he was told: '' 'Who's interested in three priests in the jungle?' and 'This might do for an art house, but I don't think the man in the street is interested.' '' David Brown, a partner in the producing firm of Zanuck/Brown Company, rejects this view of Hollywood, noting that in more than 30 years he has developed such films as ''A Man Called Peter'' and ''I'd Climb the Highest Mountain.'' Those films and inspirational costume epics like ''The Robe,'' were, he acknowledged, ''theatrical, but isn't religion theatrical? Take the evangelists Jimmy Swaggart and Pat Robertson. When you look at them they might as well be actors. They manipulate their audience, build them to a fever pitch. There's nothing wrong with that.'' The problem today, he said, is that few books or screenplays dealing with religion cross his desk. ''I can't make a case against religious films except they have to be entertaining just as an evangelist has to be entertaining,'' he said. Father Lauder, however, says that even when the challenge of doing a religious film is tried, ''they go astray because whoever is writing or directing doesn't have any insight into the nature of religion or faith or religious vocations. Sometimes the religious character comes off as pious or otherworldly or ethereal.'' The other problem, he says, is that Hollywood finds difficulty in ''dramatizing the struggle of faith.'' In ''Therese,'' the sober theme of Therese's deep reverence in the face of suffering is underscored by the film's dominant brown and green tints and the whispered, echoic dialogue. The passion of Therese's lifelong commitment as a nun is captured in scenes and phrases that have a keen sensual, almost sexual, quality. Still, one wonders whether the film's cloistered setting - there is scarcely an outdoor scene - and almost exclusive focus on religious passion will be accepted by a broad audience. Indeed, the movie's distributors chose to show it to a selective audience, scheduling it into the Lincoln Plaza Theater, where it sold $17,436 worth of tickets in its first week, a figure its makers say pleases them. In ''The Mission,'' which grossed about $3 million in its first six weeks in a few selected cities, Mr. Joffe includes a haunting scene where an Indian boy sings a hymn in front of a visiting cardinal. The scene tries to capture the tension Mr. Joffe feels about the value of proselytizing. Some people seeing the boy, Mr. Joffe observes, will think that the singing is a distortion of the boy's native culture. ''But then could that boy sing in that way, if he didn't have a spiritual understanding?'' he says. The need to find effective cinematic language to tell a religious story is part of the reason some film authorities feel movies have been timid about dealing with religion. Theater, though it also shies away from the theme, can deal better with religious themes because ''it is a verbal medium,'' says Mr. Daniel. Indeed, many religious pictures are adapted from plays, such as the recent ''Mass Appeal'' and ''Agnes of God.'' Theater's roots were in religion, beginning with the dramas of Greece and continuing through the medieval passion and morality plays. Theatrical offerings often existed as part of a religious rite, but the movies, Mr. Daniel observes, were created as a form of popular entertainment. ''It was always magic, more than a religious experience,'' he said. What the Critics Said This season four films have opened that deal with explicitly religious themes or plots. They are ''Therese,'' ''The Mission,'' ''The Sacrifice'' and ''The Name of the Rose.'' The documentary ''Mother Teresa,'' about the Nobel Prize-winning nun, was also released. Following a summary of what The New York Times critics had to say about each film. ''Theresa'': Alain Cavalier's ''cool, unsentimental, astonishingly handsome'' story of the life of St. Therese of Lisieux, wrote Vicent Canby, ''is one of those rare films whose visual beauty is not ornamental or a substitute for something else.'' ''The Mission'': The film, which won the grand prize at the Cannes Film Festival, ''is a singularly lumpy sort of movie,'' Vincent Canby wrote. It is ''a lesser variation on the kind of stately, important movie'' exemplified by a ''A Man for All Seasons,'' with ''a load of scenes that state points without dramatizing them.'' ''The Sacrifice'': ''A stunningly beautiful film that holds your attention even while you feel slightly stunned, in a less welcome way, by what is actually going on,'' wrote Walter Goodman. The director, Andrei Tarkovsky, ''owes a lot to two veterans of the Ingmar Bergman troupe, Sven Nykvist, who did the photography, and the actor Erland Josephson, who manages at moments to achieve the sense of profundity for which the movie strives.'' ''The Name of the Rose'': The adaptation of Umberto Eco's best seller, Vincent Canby wrote, is ''lightweight and lugubrious.'' The movie is ''full of the kind of atmosphere that can be created by elaborate sets, dim lighting and misty landscapes, though it has no singular character or dominant mood.'' ''Mother Teresa'': An ''appropriately modest, plain, commonsensical film,'' wrote Vicent Canby. The film makers ''honor their subject without turning her into a sentimental icon.'' The film is mostly about Mother Teresa's life today, ''and these sections are riveting, disturbing and occasionally funny.''
