920|1987\01\04|Dance|Momix, a spinoff group from the Pilobolus Dance Theater, tends to perform outside New York City. But Moses Pendleton, a founder of Pilobolus who started the smaller troupe, will now bring the lesser-known Momix into the city for a short season. The group performs Sunday (Jan. 4) through Wednesday at the Kaufmann Concert Hall in the YM- YWHA, 92nd Street and Lexington|Momix, a spinoff group from the Pilobolus Dance Theater, tends to perform outside New York City. But Moses Pendleton, a founder of Pilobolus who started the smaller troupe, will now bring the lesser-known Momix into the city for a short season. The group performs Sunday (Jan. 4) through Wednesday at the Kaufmann Concert Hall in the YM- YWHA, 92nd Street and Lexington Momix, a spinoff group from the Pilobolus Dance Theater, tends to perform outside New York City. But Moses Pendleton, a founder of Pilobolus who started the smaller troupe, will now bring the lesser-known Momix into the city for a short season. The group performs Sunday (Jan. 4) through Wednesday at the Kaufmann Concert Hall in the YM- YWHA, 92nd Street and Lexington Ave. Formed by Mr. Pendleton as a creative vehicle for himself as a soloist, Momix has had shifting personnel in the past few years. Mr. Pendleton and Alison Chase are back directing the company, and Daniel Ezralow, Jamey Hampton, Ashley Roland and Morley Steinberg, former Momixites, are also on hand. One can expect the Pilobolus-type wit to surface in the 11 works on view in two programs. As son-of-Pilobolus, Momix is less collectively oriented than its predecessor. The Joyce Theater, 19th Street and Eighth Avenue, offers a replay of its successful ''Sampler Festival'' from last year when Remy Charlip opens the series on Tuesday. Eleo Pomare's company performs on Wednesday, Marta Renzi's on Thursday and Ze'eva Cohen's on Friday of this first anthology week. All are modern dancers, and the range on view is wide. Mr. Charlip, a playful experimentalist who was in Merce Cunningham's first company in the 1950's, can also be solemn. Mr. Pomare is highly dramatic and Ms. Renzi and Ms. Cohen are capable of surprising us. CRITICS' CHOICES
