921|1987\01\04|Jazz|An unusual gathering of musicians who specialize in traditional jazz and are rarely heard in New York will be held at Carnegie Hall on Saturday at 8 P.M. The concert will be the Carnegie Hall debut of Turk Murphy's Jazz Band, which has been a fixture in San Frandisco for more than 35 years. It will also include Jim Cullum's Jazz Band from San Antonio, two members of a Chicago-based band, the Original Salty Dogs -the cornetist Lew Green and the drummer Wayne Jones - and the first New York appearance of a French group, the Hot Antic Jazz|An unusual gathering of musicians who specialize in traditional jazz and are rarely heard in New York will be held at Carnegie Hall on Saturday at 8 P.M. The concert will be the Carnegie Hall debut of Turk Murphy's Jazz Band, which has been a fixture in San Frandisco for more than 35 years. It will also include Jim Cullum's Jazz Band from San Antonio, two members of a Chicago-based band, the Original Salty Dogs -the cornetist Lew Green and the drummer Wayne Jones - and the first New York appearance of a French group, the Hot Antic Jazz An unusual gathering of musicians who specialize in traditional jazz and are rarely heard in New York will be held at Carnegie Hall on Saturday at 8 P.M. The concert will be the Carnegie Hall debut of Turk Murphy's Jazz Band, which has been a fixture in San Frandisco for more than 35 years. It will also include Jim Cullum's Jazz Band from San Antonio, two members of a Chicago-based band, the Original Salty Dogs -the cornetist Lew Green and the drummer Wayne Jones - and the first New York appearance of a French group, the Hot Antic Jazz Band. Mr. Murphy was the trombonist in Lu Watters' Yerba Buena Jazz Band, the group that was the center of the revival of traditional jazz on the West Coast in the 1940's. He started his own group in 1948; it remains today the longest-lived product of the traditional jazz revival. For many years Mr. Murphy played in his own club in San Francisco, Earthquake McGoon's, and for the past two years has been in the New Orleans Room of the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco. Jim Cullum's Jazz Band was formed 25 years ago by Mr. Cullum's father, who had been a saxophonist in Jack Teagarden's orchestra before he retired to run the family wholesale-grocery business. When young Jim started playing cornet while he was in high school, his father's musical enthusiasm was rekindled and he organized a band of San Antonio businessmen that eventually played regularly at its own club, The Landing. When the elder Cullum died in 1973, his son, who had joined the band when he finished college, took over the leadership. The Hot Antic Jazz Band specializes in jazz of the 1920's, particularly the music of the cornetist Jabbo Smith, who, in the late 20's, rivaled Louis Armstrong in popularity. In addition to their appearance at Carnegie Hall on Saturday, the French group will give New Yorkers a foretaste of their music in two performances on Thursday evening at 9 and 11 at the Universal Jazz Coalition's Jazz Center, 380 Lafayette Street. CRITICS' CHOICES
