922|1987\01\04|Art|In 1976, the Galerie Zabriskie, a small space initially devoted to photography, opened in Paris. An offshoot of the long-established Zabriskie Gallery at 724 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, it brought to the French capital the work of leading American photographers, while at the same time mounting shows devoted to Europeans.|In 1976, the Galerie Zabriskie, a small space initially devoted to photography, opened in Paris. An offshoot of the long-established Zabriskie Gallery at 724 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, it brought to the French capital the work of leading American photographers, while at the same time mounting shows devoted to Europeans. In 1976, the Galerie Zabriskie, a small space initially devoted to photography, opened in Paris. An offshoot of the long-established Zabriskie Gallery at 724 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, it brought to the French capital the work of leading American photographers, while at the same time mounting shows devoted to Europeans. And it sparked the inclusion of photography in the exhibition roster of the parent gallery in New York. Now, in celebration of the Paris branch's 10th anniversary, the Zabriskie Gallery here is presenting ''French Photography,'' an elegant display of prints from the stock of both galleries and from the personal collection of their proprietor, Virginia Zabriskie. Meanwhile, the Paris gallery is presenting an updated version of its 1976 inaugural show, ''Ten American Contemporary Photographers.'' Although in her catalogue introduction Miss Zabriskie describes herself as having been a ''debutante'' in the field 10 years ago, the rich and varied assemblage of ''French Photography'' attests to the ''eye'' she has developed for top-flight work, particularly for artists of Surrealist persuasion. There are such gems here as Man Ray's 1936 photograph of a Venus torso evocatively tied with rope; a collage by Georges Hugnet of two women whose starry-eyed repose is threatened by a locomotive roaring out of the sea, and Germaine Krull's quintessentially Parisian ''La Mome Bijou,'' c. 1932, a hard-bitten madame who seems to wear on her chest and fingers the entire contents of a jewelry store. It's a stimulating exhibition, of well-known work and affecting discoveries. And it confirms that the Zabriskie move 10 years ago to partner photography with painting and sculpture was a wise one. Through Jan. 17. CRITICS' CHOICES
