923|1987\01\04|Nonprofit Organizations: Just Imagine Not Havng Them|NONPROFIT organizations play a sometimes-camouflaged, yet crucial, role in the quality of life in New Jersey. It is nearly impossible to imagine life in the state without Big Brothers/Big Sisters, Newark Symphone Hall, Y.M.C.A. camps, New Brunswick Tomorrow, Planned Parenthood and the Turtle Back Zoo in West|NONPROFIT organizations play a sometimes-camouflaged, yet crucial, role in the quality of life in New Jersey. It is nearly impossible to imagine life in the state without Big Brothers/Big Sisters, Newark Symphone Hall, Y.M.C.A. camps, New Brunswick Tomorrow, Planned Parenthood and the Turtle Back Zoo in West NONPROFIT organizations play a sometimes-camouflaged, yet crucial, role in the quality of life in New Jersey. It is nearly impossible to imagine life in the state without Big Brothers/Big Sisters, Newark Symphone Hall, Y.M.C.A. camps, New Brunswick Tomorrow, Planned Parenthood and the Turtle Back Zoo in West Orange. Nonprofit organizations perform total services in our communities. As Federal support has declined, the gap has been filled largely by nonprofit groups providing services at low or no cost, in contrast to the full costs of Government programs. Community volunteer agencies run by community residents are more responsive and more effective in meeting community needs. As independent organizations, nonprofits are free to explore and innovate, and to fight inequality and injustice. They can advocate controversial causes, undertake unpopular projects and espouse minority viewpoints. They perform valuable watchdog functions, monitoring both business and government. Nonprofits meet a deep-rooted need of people to work together, to do good. The paid and volunteer workforce of New Jersey's nonprofit agencies are motivated by organizational aims, and by personal goals as well. A recent study sponsored by the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company of Newark discovered that volunteering had unexpected benefits: people involved in volunteer activities are more-satisfied, more-productive employees. A study commissioned by the Center for Non-Profit Corporations reveals significant and surprising characteristics of the New Jersey nonprofit sector. The most compelling characteristic is diversity. Seventy-five percent of the nonprofit organizations in New Jersey fall into the nonreligious service category. Health, education and social services predominate. Institutional and residential care, housing, community development and recreation are also strongly represented. Based on 1982 data, the latest year for which figures are available, New Jersey nonprofits employed an estimated 280,000 full-time workers. This figure represented 9 percent of the state's local civilian workforce, double the 124,000 people employed in the chemical manufacturing industry and more than one and a half times the 165,000 employed in finance, insurance and real estate. Also based on the same data, the average nonprofit organization in New Jersey has eight employees and benefits from the unpaid services of 13 volunteers a month. It is estimated that, on a monthly basis, 332,000 New Jerseyans volunteer their services to nonprofit agencies. Each month, more than 8 percent of the state's population of 7 million supports nonprofit organizations through paid or volunteer services. New Jersey's nonprofit sector is well established. About 80 percent of the organizations have been in operation between 8 and 20 years, 50 percent are more than 20 years old and 20 percent are more than 60. New Jersey's nonprofit sector also has a strong local orientation. Fifty-eight percent of the nonprofit organizations serve a single neighborhood, municipalilty or county, whereas only 25 percent have a statewide or broader base. Most of New Jersey's nonprofit organizations serve a relatively small number of clients. Thirty percent serve fewer than 100 individuals annually, 30 percent serve from 100 to 732 and 30 percent between 732 and 10,000. Only 10 percent of the agencies serve more than 10,000 people in one year. In 1982, total revenues of the New Jersey nonprofit sector amounted to $6.5 billion and total assets exceeded $7.2 billion. However, this capital was highly concentrated among a small segment of the nonprofit sector; half of the nonprofit agencies has revenues under $70,000 and assets of less than $90,000. New Jersey nonprofits receive most of their income form the following sources: 21.7 percent from fees for service, 17 percent from individual donations, 10.9 percent from the Federal Government, 10.8 percent from membership dues, 8 percent from the state government, 7.1 percent from corporate and philanthropic foundations and 5.6 percent from federated campaigns, such as United Way. Fifty-five percent of all funds received by the nonprofits come from individuals - through dues, fees and contributions. New Jersey's nonprofits have an estimated 4.5 million dues-paying members. All these figures, however, ignore variations in income source among different segments of the nonprofit sector. For example, human service nonprofit organizations rely more heavily on government funds than do others. The New Jersey nonprofit sector is vitally important to the quality of life in the state. State policies can either contribute to or undermine the health of nonprofit organizations. Although the effects of recent overhaul of the Federal tax policy are yet to be seen, there is little question that nonprofit organizations will be affected. Changes in state tax policy also will have planned and unanticipated consequences for nonprofits. In November, I testified before the State and Local Expenditure and Revenue Policy Commission on behalf of New Jersey's nonprofit sector. I recommended state tax policy that allows personal deduction of charitable contributions and encourages, through deductions or tax credits, corporate support of nonprofit agencies. I also recommended the review of all policies for inadvertent discrimination against nonprofit employees, as is the current case with tax-sheltered annuities. Finally, I recommended that state policy allow nonprofit agencies to seek creative means to maintain their independence. The nonprofit organizations serving New Jersey reflect the character of thestate; they are small and very locally oriented. As such, they require supportive state policies to maintain their viability and vitality, and, in turn, the quality of life in New Jersey. NEW JERSEY OPINION
