924|1987\01\04|DEMOCRATS EAGER TO TAKE CONTROL|THE General Assembly will convene its 1987 session Wednesday with many new faces confronting old issues and the Democrats savoring their return to power.|THE General Assembly will convene its 1987 session Wednesday with many new faces confronting old issues and the Democrats savoring their return to power. THE General Assembly will convene its 1987 session Wednesday with many new faces confronting old issues and the Democrats savoring their return to power. ''Delightful,'' said John B. Larson, an East Hartford Democrat who will be the President pro tem of the State Senate. ''I think it's going to be a very exciting and productive couple of years,'' said Irving J. Stolberg, a New Haven Democrat who will be back as Speaker of the House of Representatives after being on the sidelines the last two years as minority leader while the Republicans ran the legislature. ''It's a lot easier with majorities than with minorities,'' Mr. Stolberg said. The opening day of a new legislature by tradition is more for ceremony than substance. All 151 Representatives and 36 Senators will be sworn in for two-year terms. Governor O'Neill and the five other Democrats who were re-elected or elected to statewide office on Nov. 4 will take their oaths of office for four-year terms. At a joint session of the legislature, Mr. O'Neill will deliver his State of the State address, outlining his legislative goals for the new session. Once the opening formalities are completed, legislators will spend the next five months grappling with a host of issues that have dominated the legislative agenda in recent years, such as: * How to spend the state's budget surplus, currently estimated at $142 million, and provide property tax relief to the cities and towns? * Should Connecticut be opened to full interstate banking instead of restricting mergers to banks within New England? * What changes should be made in legislation adopted last year to raise the starting salaries of public school teachers and to make liability insurance more affordable by limiting damage awards by the courts? Dealing with these questions will be sizable Democratic majorities in both houses and an influx of new legislators. The Democratic margins will be 92 to 59 in the House and 25 to 11 in the Senate. Of the 92 Democratic Representatives, 38 are newly elected, as are 13 of the 25 Democratic Senators, although a few of the new lawmakers had prior service in the legislature. ''You've got an energetic and creative legislature, particularly in the freshman class in both the House and the Senate,'' Mr. Stolberg said in an interview. ''I think the Governor's job, and my job and John Larson's job will be to channel a lot of that creativity into productive channels, and I think we're going to work together very well to do that.'' Mr. Larson, in a separate interview, said that he and Mr. Stolberg were in agreement on many issues, had jointly announced the Senate and House co-chairmen of the legislature's existing committees, and were forming new special committees to study statewide problems, such as housing, drug abuse and conditions in the workplace. ''It will just be a question of coming together,'' Mr. Larson said. ''We've had a very good relationship in the past with the Governor. We look for that communication to be expanding and being better.'' For the first time in recent memory, Mr. Larson said, the Democrats will control both houses of the legislature and the Governor's office at a time when the state is running a surplus. ''That presents us with an opportunity,'' Mr. Larson said, noting that Democratic leaders were seeking to set schedules that would allow the legislature to complete its work more efficiently and minimize the usual last-minute crush of legislation at adjournment, as well as an agenda that he said would demonstrate fiscal restraint. He said that all 187 legislators would probably have different ideas on how to spend the state's growing surplus, but that most Democratic Senators agreed with Mr. O'Neill that the state should seek to aid the municipalities in holding down or reducing local property taxes. Mr. Larson said he did not favor looking for major cuts in state taxes as of now. ''We don't know when the downturn in the economy is going to take place, but we know that certainly is inevitable,'' he said. ''We want to prepare for that eventuality.'' Mr. Stolberg also said ''a major focus'' would be on local property-tax relief, although he said there was ''a possibility'' of some other tax reductions. While some legislators view Mr. Stolberg as more liberal in his views than Mr. O'Neill, Mr. Stolberg said that he and the Governor were in agreement on most issues. ''Bill and I have worked well by necessity in the past, and increasingly with a commitment to common goals,'' Mr. Stolberg said. ''It's interesting that if you talk to him and you talk to me, you find that probably our top four or five goals for the next couple of years are the same - housing, drugs, aid to the cities and towns,'' Mr. Stolberg said. ''Whether it's coincidence, or just working together, we've become more aware of the same kind of needs.'' In preparing for the new session, he said, ''I'm looking forward to it. You don't know how much. And not just because we're back in the majority, but because the quality of our caucus is so superb.''
