925|1987\01\04|A TRUE TALE OF TASTE BUDS THAT HAVE NEVER OPENED|SOME people are color-blind and some are tone-deaf. Me?|SOME people are color-blind and some are tone-deaf. Me? SOME people are color-blind and some are tone-deaf. Me? I have trouble with my sense of taste. Oh, I can taste all right, but my palate can't seem to distinguish the nuances other people apparently enjoy. Take cheese, for example. My friends' eyes glisten when they talk about the different taste sensations of Roquefort, Brie, Camembert, Stilton, Cheddar and so on. To me, cheese is cheese. In the land of subtle savors, my tongue is an ignoramus. My taste buds quiver only when shocked by something pungent, like a hot dog with all the trimmings. I became aware of my failing a long time ago, when I was in junior high school. Every Thursday afternoon, my class would take a trip to some point of interest in New York City. The trip I remember particularly was one to the Stock Exchange. I don't recall much about the Exchange, but I do remember how hungry we all were after we emerged. We had little more than return subway fare, but we pooled our pennies and in a nearby cafeteria bought as many slices of bread - plain rye bread - as we could. Clustered around a cafeteria table, we smeared each slice with mustard and ketchup, which were free. It was delicious, and I still drool at the memory. So you see, I do have taste buds; it's just that they're not refined. I go to fine French, Italian and Chinese restaurants, but, although I like fine food, I like it, I'm afraid - because of my primitive sense of taste - for all the wrong reasons. Like Chinese egg rolls: I like them not so much for the filling as for the crispy fried crust, which I can dab with mustard. And boiled shrimp. I like them, too, but only because I can saturate them in a sauce spiced with Tabasco. And I like boeuf bourgignon only if the bread basket is filled with slices of crusty French bread. The same thing happens at home. There was the time that we had boiled beef for dinner and I discovered there was no horseradish in the house. Boiled beef without horseradish?  I jumped into the car and raced to the supermarket for a jar of the stuff, knowing that the satisfaction I anticipated was not in the beef so much as in the tang of the horseradish. I find that I dream of corned beef sandwiches made with rye bread. I once went into a delicatessan for a corned beef sandwich and was told the rye bread had run out and would I want corned beef on white or whole wheat? Corned beef on white or whole wheat?? I stalked out in indignation. In truth, if the deli had been out of corned beef, I would almost have been content with the rye bread -with a generous application of mustard on it, of course. Talk about your Epicurean meals. Give me a sandwich made with fresh, crunchy rye bread and I don't care what filling you use. You can put in tuna or cream cheese or peanut butter, and it'll be fine with me. If you have to, just give me the rye bread alone; I'll sink my teeth into it and chew it, reveling in the strong taste of the brown brittle crust and the rough-textured doughy center spiced with caraway seeds. My wife, who is a gourmet with tastes that run to Quiche Lorraine and Coquilles Saint Jacques, does not approve of my plebeian palate. The other day, we went to one of those restaurants that feature salad bars. I put a wedge of lettuce and five slices of rye bread on my plate and headed back to the table to enjoy my Lucullan feast. My wife muttered bitterly that, if that was all I liked, she could easily prepare a perfect dinner for me: a loaf of rye bread and a few jars of mustard, ketchup and horseradish. I began to laugh, but then stopped, because I was suddenly struck by the thought that the combination did sound enticing, especially if I could slip in a sour pickle. SEAKING PERSONALLY
