926|1987\01\04|Cable TV|''Know who's going to steal the picture?'' murmured Marlon Brando on the set of Hollywood's 1953 version of ''Julius Caesar.'' ''Him,'' the actor told a visiting friend from New York, indicating John Gielgud. Positioned off-camera behind a fake column of M-G-M's Roman Forum, the toga-clad stars were watching Joseph L.|''Know who's going to steal the picture?'' murmured Marlon Brando on the set of Hollywood's 1953 version of ''Julius Caesar.'' ''Him,'' the actor told a visiting friend from New York, indicating John Gielgud. Positioned off-camera behind a fake column of M-G-M's Roman Forum, the toga-clad stars were watching Joseph L. ''Know who's going to steal the picture?'' murmured Marlon Brando on the set of Hollywood's 1953 version of ''Julius Caesar.'' ''Him,'' the actor told a visiting friend from New York, indicating John Gielgud. Positioned off-camera behind a fake column of M-G-M's Roman Forum, the toga-clad stars were watching Joseph L. Mankiewicz pilot the mob-riot scene following the funeral oration by Marc Antony. Brando's fire-and-ice speech had just drawn applause from the crowd of extras. But he was right about his colleague. Reviewers liked the film, and Brando, well enough, though Louis Calhern's Caesar was deemed on the pale side. Yet, Shakespeare soared, they felt, in Gielgud's electric portrait of ''lean and hungry'' Cassius. Cable viewers can see for themselves on Saturday morning at 8 on Showtime. Most of the week's play adaptations stem from Broadway, not the Bard. The vibrant New York musical ''On the Town'' (1949), with its panoramic backgrounds, epitomizes the title as stage props never could - Sunday at 1 P.M. on Showtime. The camera remains fixed and too close for Carson McCullers' thoughtful ''Member of the Wedding'' (1953), with Julie Harris, Ethel Waters and Brandon de Wilde. Hardly a movie at all, it's still a sensitive study of human relations - Wednesday at 6:30 A.M. on Cinemax. In contrast, the Marx Brothers trumpet through ''Room Service'' (1938) and it's a good thing they do, for the fun stays wall-bound - Wednesday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 A.M. on WHT. But ''Oliver!'' (1968) expands the London stage musical into a sumptious eyeful for the family - Wednesday at 2:30 P.M. on Cinemax. ''The Old Maid'' (1939), with Bette Davis, Miriam Hopkins and Jane Bryan, far surpasses the stately, rather starchy play -Thursday at 2:30 P.M. on Cinemax. Another vivified Broadway product is ''Command Decision'' (1949), about wartime American bombardiers in Europe, with Clark Gable, Van Johnson, Charles Bickford, Brian Donlevy and John Hodiak. The surprise standout in such burly company is Walter Pidgeon - Saturday at 11 A.M. on WTBS. CRITICS' CHOICES
