928|1987\01\04|THE COGNITION CONNECTION| PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING  Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition.  By David E. Rumelhart, James L. McClelland and  the PDP Research Group.  Volume One: Foundations.  Illustrated. 547 pp.  Volume Two: Psychological and Biological Models.  Illustrated.| PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING  Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition.  By David E. Rumelhart, James L. McClelland and  the PDP Research Group.  Volume One: Foundations.  Illustrated. 547 pp.  Volume Two: Psychological and Biological Models.  Illustrated. PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING  Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition.  By David E. Rumelhart, James L. McClelland and  the PDP Research Group.  Volume One: Foundations.  Illustrated. 547 pp.  Volume Two: Psychological and Biological Models.  Illustrated. 611 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:  A Bradford Book/The MIT Press. $27.50 each, $45 a set. IF there has been a scientific revolution in the study of mind, based on ideas of symbolic computation, the counterrevolution is coming into view. ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' presents important contributions to a new theory of cognition called ''connectionism.'' This theory assumes that the mind is a very large set of very simple elementary units connected with one another in a network. Mental processes are interactions between units that are individually simple but have complex results in the overall patterns that occur in the network. The term ''parallel'' refers to the assumption that units excite and inhibit each other throughout the network simultaneously - in parallel operations rather than in a sequence of operations. The term ''distributed'' refers to the assumption that knowledge consists of the connections between pairs of units that are distributed throughout the network rather than being stored in localized structures. Considered in the short term - the last 15 years or so - the ideas represented in ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' fundamentally challenge the main concepts and assumptions of modern cognitive science. In the long term, these scientific developments promise to rebalance a debate that has traditionally been at the core of theoretical discussions about the mind, a debate that has been one-sided for two decades. The research program that currently dominates the study of complex mental processes is based on the idea of symbolic computation - the idea that knowledge and mental processes involve structures of symbols and transformations of symbolic expressions. A few cognitive scientists began developing models based on symbolic computation about 30 years ago when the dominant theoretical framework was a version of association theory involving connections between stimuli and responses. The theoretical approach based on symbolic computation was pioneered by Noam Chomsky in linguistics and Allen Newell, Herbert Simon and Marvin Minsky in computer science and psychology, and the major achievements of cognitive science in the 1970's and 80's have largely been developments of that idea. Connectionists - including James McClelland, David Rumelhart and the other authors of ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' - are developing a new form of association theory, thus reviving a longstanding debate. The issue is whether structure of information and mental organization should be assumed in psychological theories or whether theoretical assumptions should be limited to simple mental units and connections between them. Association theorists believe that complex cognition - such as understanding and using language, reasoning with and about abstract concepts and solving intellectual problems - should be explained in terms of elementary structures and processes. Theorists on the other side of the debate have argued that association theory is too simple to account for complex knowledge and thinking, and that structures of information and mental organization must be included in the assumptions of cognitive theory. The current proponents of complex assumptions use the idea of symbolic computation, but the debate goes back at least to Locke, who articulated an association theory in response to Descartes's doctrine about innate ideas, as well as to Kant, who responded to Hume's associationism with a view that fundamental intuitions of space, time and causality are present a priori. Before word processors became common, many people thought of computers as dealing entirely with numerical calculation. In fact, computation is fundamentally a process that operates on symbols, and operations on the symbolic expressions of arithmetic and algebra are a special case of symbolic computation. An important advance of the 50's was the development of programming languages for manipulating symbolic expressions such as words, sentences and general formulas of language and logic. These programming languages - especially one called LISP (for list processing language) - have been used in the development of a theory of cognition in which mental processes are understood as processes of symbolic computation. An impressive set of scientific achievements has been based on symbolic computation. Two important theoretical ideas are involved. One is that patterns of generic relations, or schemata, are used to organize information in specific situations. Another is that cognitive skills are composed of rules that can be repre-sented symbolically in the form, ''if this, then that.'' By assuming that knowledge has the form of schemata and that the ''if, then'' rules obtain, researchers have devel-oped models that simulate significant characteristics of human reasoning and problem solving. In ''Parallel Distributed Processing,'' Mr. Rumelhart and Mr. McClelland played leading roles - they are authors or co-authors of 14 of the 26 chapters of this work - but authorship is divided among 16 psychologists, computer science mathematicians and neuroscientists who collaborated over a period of four years. These volumes do not present all the research topics that are currently being developed using parallel distributed computation - in particular, work on computational theories of vision is not included - but the research contributions presented here form an important collection that demonstrates the potential of connectionism to address fundamental questions in the theory of cognition. The idea of symbolic computation became dominant by the mid-70's because the associationist ideas of the time were inadequate to explain complex human cognition, such as language and problem-solving. That the new connectionist idea is more powerful is shown by several chapters of ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' that provide analyses in areas where symbolic computation has been strongest. Although these researchers are in the early stages of their work, they present significant progress on several important topics, including understanding of sentences, learning past tenses of verbs and learning to classify individuals in categories. In symbolic computation theory, these are topics for which knowledge of schemata and the ''if, then'' rules are assumed to play essential roles, and models include symbolic representations of the schemata and rules. Connectionist networks do not contain representations of rules or schemata as such, and the analyses in ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' show how performance that seems to reflect knowledge of those things can in fact occur because there are connections in a network. Connectionist models also have some important advantages over models that are formulated as symbolic computation rules and data structures. Human perception and understanding are often effective in spite of information that is incomplete or ambiguous. Flexibility and use of multiple sources of information, which characterize much human cognition, have been difficult to simulate with symbolic computation. They are easier to represent in connectionist models, in which all processes are assumed to involve multiple and interacting factors. One source of inspiration for connectionist theorizing is the possibility that these models may be more directly related to the brain mechanisms that underlie cognition than are models based on symbolic computation. A network of interconnected units that excite and inhibit one another is consistent with general characteristics of the brain cortex as it is now understood. For the most part, however, the analyses presented in these volumes use a neural analogy loosely, as the biologically oriented chapters acknowledge, although there are a few significant cases in which detailed relations between connectionist models and brain science have been worked out. The need for stronger theoretical connections between cognitive science and neuroscience is a major challenge, but not a reason to reject the scientific accomplishments of work like that reported here. The need for explanatory theories in psychology is suf-ficient to justify a major continuation of scientific efforts along the lines of these contributions. CONNECTIONISTS have many challenging tasks before them in the development of their new version of associationism. Sequential processes and reasoning with symbols are important aspects of cognition that have been clarified in symbolic computation theory but are difficult to incorporate into connectionism. ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' presents promising ideas that could lead to productive new insights on many difficult issues, but most of the work lies ahead. Connectionists have much to do to catch up with the substantial progress that has been made in symbolic computation theory on problems of symbolic reasoning, the understanding of language and other important topics. Many fundamental problems of cognition have not been addressed adequately by using models based on symbolic computation. As we proceed with work on these issues in the theory of cognition, we will be more productive because of the revival of an associationist side of the discussion. The contributions published in ''Parallel Distributed Processing'' represent connectionism's recent development as a promising line of research, and if future work is successful the results will constitute a major scientific achievement. The effort to explain the structures of information in human cognition, rather than merely to analyze and describe them, should be a major activity of cognitive science, especially cognitive psychology. That effort has been less salient lately than it deserves to be, and the promise of its revitalization is important - in the field and for its contribution to scientific knowledge at large.
