929|1987\01\04|DECIDING TO DO THE IMPOSSIBLE| THE COUNTERLIFE  By Philip Roth.  324 pp. New York:  Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $18.95.| THE COUNTERLIFE  By Philip Roth.  324 pp. New York:  Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $18.95. THE COUNTERLIFE  By Philip Roth.  324 pp. New York:  Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $18.95. THERE have been thousands of different drawings of the world, many maps made of reality. Each puts the gods, the good, the false and the true in a different place. They cannot each be correct - there are too many counterclaims - yet society after society has sailed to greatness (not simply to the doom they also doomed themselves to) following these false charts, these fictions that have been projected upon the planet. And the planet, like the great screen of a drive-in movie, accepts them all, lighted by the illusions of passion, for as long as the passions last. If so, then our lives are made of fictions, beliefs we construct and then dwell in like a beach house in Malibu. When we change our life - one of the central themes of Philip Roth's magnificent new novel, a remarkable change of direction itself - we recreate ''a counterlife that is one's own anti-myth,'' as Mr. Roth's protagonist, Nathan Zuckerman, surmises. ''Nothing is impossible,'' declares Mordecai Lippman, the fanatical Zionist of the novel, who, like the phoenix, practically invents himself out of ashes and heat. ''All the Jew must decide is what he wants - then he can act and achieve it.'' But first of all you must become a Jew, a root Jew, not merely a branch Jew like some bank in the suburbs. In novel after novel, Mr. Roth has asked what Jews want with somewhat the same irritated bewilderment we associate with Freud's question: ''What do women want?'' In ''The Counterlife,'' the query has become more riddling, more radical and, despite the antic flipflops of the plot, more serious yet no less witty for all that: can a Jew, if he wishes - if he wants -change into a Jew? And in what direction should he go to do that? And why should the quiet course of a comfortable life be shattered by such questions, which were always there to be put, but were answered by not being asked? And is not the anti-Semitism of a Jew the refusal of a Jew to be one? These are a few of the questions Philip Roth's latest novel considers, turning them round like meat on a spit. With respect to his own past as an author, there are many questions - the hedges, qualifications, objections entertained by critics - to which it gives a resounding answer. ''The Counterlife,'' it seems to me, constitutes a fulfillment of tendencies, a successful integration of themes, and the final working through of obsessions that have previously troubled if not marred his work. I hope it felt, as Mr. Roth wrote it, like a triumph, because that is certainly how it reads to me. THE style is a triumph too. It is no longer a style at war with itself, as Mr. Roth's sometimes used to be, its cleverness undercutting its own emotions, its satire thinning a subject already sliced. Its combativeness is no longer pointed at the reader, the critic, the family or some other ancient adversary. The world of ''The Counterlife'' is made of intelligent, argumentative, witty, observant words. They are words woven now, after the practice of many years, into a rich, muscular, culturally complex style that even in purely narrative moments seems to come not from the end of a pen but through the flow of the voice, thus from a mouth - the organ that Zuckerman's brother, a dentist, seductively describes, for the young assistant he is about to hire, as genital. It is surely the opening through which, to continue life, the world is received. It is also, quite as surely, the loudspeaker of the soul. And in ''The Counterlife'' a lot of those loudspeakers are on. Full blast. The book comes to us wrapped in more than its dust jacket. It continues and seems to conclude a series of affairs, ambitions and other anxieties taken from the life of Nathan Zuckerman; a life whose telling began before its tolling in ''The Ghost Writer'' of 1979, and which, after two more novels, ''Zuckerman Unbound'' in 1981, then ''The Anatomy Lesson'' in 1983, was advertised as ending in 1985 with the addition of a novella, ''The Prague Orgy,'' so that the entire collection could be called ''Zuckerman Bound,'' a volume you were encouraged to buy in the belief that at last you had hold of the whole thing. So our present text is legitimately preceded, if not surrounded, by the four books that carry the Zuckerman name to this point. However, Mr. Roth would now have us believe that Nathan Zuckerman is the invention of Peter Tarnopol, the professor and novelist of ''My Life as a Man.'' Tarnopol endeavors to come to some understanding of himself by composing a series of fictions that are then topped off by the real thing, Tarnopol's autobiography (which we should no more believe is true of Tarnopol than ''My Life as a Man'' is true of Mr. Roth). And this conjunction of fact with fancy presumably allows us to estimate the alterations imagination makes to any fictionalized biography. In a Roth novel, it is not unusual for characters to cross from one text to another as though they were crossing a street. Dr. Spielvogel, the psychiatrist of ''My Life as a Man,'' is also the analytic ear listening to Portnoy's complaint. Nathan Zuckerman is the author of a notoriously dirty book, an alleged libel of the Jews, ''Carnovsky,'' which has made him both rich and reviled, just as ''Portnoy's Complaint'' made Philip Roth well known, well off and the target of slings. So if we follow this tangle from head to tail, we shall discover that Mr. Roth has created a character, Peter Tarnopol, who has in turn invented Nathan Zuckerman, who has, for his part, written the same book Mr. Roth has (since ''Carnovsky'' equals ''Portnoy''). This ring of real and fictive authors puts us at least a touch back, if not smack back at the beginning. It is consequently not stretching the facts but admitting them to say that ''The Counterlife'' is both thematically and structurally connected to the general body of Philip Roth's work. Nor is this all. One of Philip Roth's preoccupations as a writer has been the relation between ''his life as a man'' and ''his life as a character''; between life in the world and life in his fictions; between the fictions Mr. Roth reads and the fictions Mr. Roth writes. Both the life and the work of a writer like Kafka are as real and resounding to Philip Roth the writer as any other element of his material. When Zuckerman imagines that a young woman he has just met and immediately fancies is not the ghostly author of ''The Diary of Anne Frank,'' but Frank herself (a survivor as well as a victim of the camps, who has continued to play dead to enhance the influence of her book), we are not dealing simply with the perhaps absurd obsession of a character in a fiction. The Zuckerman books are full of warnings to their readers about the differences, subtle sometimes, between real life and art: ''They  [ those affected by the sex-mad Carnovsky ]  had mistaken impersonation for confession and were calling out to a character who lived in a book.'' Zuckerman's anguish over this error is expressed too eloquently and too often to be merely his. But now we have crossed the line to lay the attitude of a fictional figure at its author's feet. If ''the artist descends within himself,'' in those words of Conrad Zuckerman approvingly quotes, ''and in that lonely region of stress and strife . . . finds the terms of his appeal,'' then Mr. Roth does not go down so deeply that he loses sight of the salient facts of his life. His personal problems, particularly successes and sufferings, continue to preoccupy him. What Conrad clearly expected the artist to do was to descend beyond those particularities to a place where pride and anxiety and stamina and weakness could find new terms for their expression - locate the general, not the local, source of their appeal. DESPITE the author's disclaimers, the many parallels between the Zuckerman saga and the Philip Roth story invite the confusion. Part of ''The Anatomy Lesson,'' for instance, is a vengeful reply to a particularly stinging critical piece on Mr. Roth by Irving Howe. The identity of Mr. Howe is hidden like a lamppost in the living room. Another section is concerned to rebut the feminists. A reader ignorant of Portnoy's habits, unfamiliar with the critical climate, a reader for whom the author's name is merely that - short, an off rhyme with wrath - would be blessed by such ignorance, and possibly able to see the book, because this new work, like each of the others, is not only wrapped in Zuckerman and Tarnopol, it is also wrapped in Roth. If you are a black writer, professional blacks (that is, people whose business is being black and little else) will require blackness of you, although each critic may favor a different shade; and if you are a woman, the feminists will make analogous demands, and hunt through every page looking for the incriminating pronoun and other signs you have succumbed to something macho; and if you are a Jewish writer it will be the same, though the quarreling groups will perhaps be more numerous and have been at it longer. Philip Roth has been praised by this group and damned by that, and charged and vindicated and hailed and cursed by readers whose real interests were as far from literature as fanaticism will always take you - to the opposite pole. It is a pole Mr. Roth stirs them up with. So the Zuckerman chronicles continue. Nothing is changed. Every old quarrel has a home in this text. There are references, naturally, to previous books. We are still teased by details taken from the author's life and we are encouraged to search for more, while at the same time the fundamental connection is denied. Sexual expression, phallic power, oral fixation: each is present. Family oppression and familial duties: these too. But above all, there is the presence of the question of what it means to be a Jew. Nevertheless, everything has changed after all. These themes no longer possess our author. He has become their master. The book begins with the brother's death. Henry, the dentist, has heart trouble. The medicine he is taking for it makes him impotent. Unable to sport with his hygienist any longer, Henry grows desperate and undergoes a bypass operation that will remove him from his medicine, restore his manhood and incidentally repair his heart. His wife chooses to believe it is for her he has run this risk. But soon Mr. Roth will skillfully split the narrative. Henry will unaccountably recover from his death at the hands of the text, and with his revived heart will hasten abruptly away to Israel to take up righteousness and seek the faith. There he will carry a pistol and develop a different, more martial, manhood. It is not heaven he has gone to but Judea. It is not the West Bank he has gone to, but War. We learn that Nathan Zuckerman, Henry's nemesis, has refused to speak at his brother's funeral. For reasons, of course. Well, wait. Henry will get his opportunity to refuse to speak at Nathan's. These are counterlives but suspiciously parallel tales: woman against woman, marriage against marriage, both or neither brother surviving the knife, as the novel continues its surprises. For Nathan's story could be said to commence with his death, too, at a later date in the text, though from similar causes and resembling motives. Nathan has the same punning problem - a troubled heart -with its emasculating consequences, which means he cannot marry the sweet young object of his present affections and beget the child he finally thinks he wants. So he too will seek a remedy beneath the surgeon's knife and receive his quietus for it. First, Tale One must wag. (But both may belong to the same dog.) We follow Nathan as he follows Henry to Israel. There he receives doses of rhetoric from every mouth sufficient to cure complacency by killing it. Hope is killed as well. The European Jew speaks, the radical right-wing Jew speaks (he also speaks for the Arabs so as to have some worthy opposition). The anti-Semitic Jew speaks, the peaceful Jew speaks, the Furies have their innings. Like sound trucks in the street, through Nathan they holler wonderfully at one another. The arguments concern Jews, are about Jewishness, about power, and are wholly political. The political and the moral are artfully confused. So this is not a novel about ideas only, but about beliefs - those beliefs that, like bombs, we daily drop on one another. The speakers' rhetoric is their rifle. And the characters establish their character by means of their speech, through the defense, the advocacy, the oppressiveness of their opinions. This speech does not turn back upon itself as Stanley Elkin's often does, nor are its rhythms so obviously Yiddish as Bernard Malamud's sometimes were, nor is it quite as continuously civilized as Saul Bellow's. It has an insistently forward push toward the next thought, the next feeling, a future desire; it does not normally dawdle in description, or stop for meditative poesy, or paralyze its movement with refinements and indecisions. In this it is urban, male (no matter the sex of the speaker), quick, artful yet blunt, overbearing, mean, street smart but worldly wise. In each case, it seems superb for its purposes and complete. Every belief is buttressed, not with reasons, but with the crimes of opponents. The gentiles have done thus and so; the Arabs, also, have done thus and so; therefore we, the Jews, should do thus, and thus, and thus and so. Action follows action like an avalanche of rock. Of course resentment stretches as far as one can see sand. And every Jew, except for the secular, corrupt, pluralistic and skeptically minded Nathan, believes it essential that every Jew believe the same as every other Jew, achieve the solidarity of the Wailing Wall. The speeches which give air to these opinions are intensely interesting, passionately convincing and perfectly phrased. Although each view is by its fevered nature a partial one, such is Mr. Roth's skill that the accumulation of these partials makes for an impressive whole. UNARGUED lives may also be worth living, but you won't find them in this book. The two brothers continue to counter each other, appear to oppose each other, as the geography of the novel does, locating some of its scenes in America, others in England's green and pleasant land as well as in the deserts of Judea. Nathan's new love lives in London, and this permits Mr. Roth to parallel the book's vivid earlier scenes at the Wailing Wall with Christmas caroling in a cathedral. He lays the complacent, stupid, almost serene anti-Semitism Nathan confronts in Gloucestershire alongside the louder, less secure dislike for the goyim he finds in Israel. And finds in his brother. And finds in himself, for he is, of course, his brother - at least by now. He has accepted his brother -American middle-class dentist one moment, Israeli militant another - in order to continue to live. Live what? A fictive life? Each often painful encounter with these examples of Jewish love and Jewish hate has cleansed Nathan Zuckerman, who has sought the solution to his nature through book after book, of one more trapping of his type, until he finally sees himself as ''a Jew without Jews, without Judaism, without Zionism, without Jewishness, without a temple or an army or even a pistol, a Jew clearly without a home, just the object itself, like a glass or an apple.'' Except for the phallic scar, the venereal voodoo he desires to have performed upon his son - a futile mark of difference, it would seem to me, since circumcision is now more fashionable among the gentiles than pierced ears. A LITTLE past its middle, in a brilliant postmodern maneuver, the book becomes posthumous, and begins reading itself both front and rear, before and after, like a swing. With Nathan dead of Henry's heart, Henry seizes and censors the manuscript of his brother's latest book. It is a draft of ''The Counterlife.'' Our surprise at these developments, and a number of others, is honestly accounted for by the structure of the book and brilliantly brought off each time. I think the novel's daring shape will continue to possess its fascination for us upon a second look, a third reread, just the way the turns in Haydn's ''Surprise'' symphony still delight us. When a woman becomes a character, not a lover or a wife; when this character expresses her desire to leave the work the way she might a husband; when goy and galuth quarrel over, of all things, circumcision; when we remember, as good readers ought, what St. Paul said it took to make a Christian: a faith in Jesus as the Saviour that (not to hold back the knife) was the equivalent in spirit to the circumcision of the heart; and when a man (a character) who is already dead when we read the words that render his forthcoming life is heatedly arguing with his wife about one more operation, insisting that the paper tale we've been passing through in their company is ''as close to life as you, and I, and our child can ever hope to come''; and when we know, or think we know, that Zuckerman, now only ashes, wrote his own maybe-marriage with its male offspring and the boy's disputed penis into being the way he wrote his own funeral eulogy; when we realize that Zuckerman himself is Tarnopol's creation, and that Tarnopol lives only in another book by Mr. Roth, and that Mr. Roth, too, in the guise of Portnoy, Zuckerman and others, is in this same work as well, thrashing around; then we may be willing to agree that all of them have changed their nature right in front of us, passing, as it were, behind the page like a cloud; but such is the rightness of the form, the richness of the theme and the eloquence in the execution of this splendid novel that we can assent to the conventions, to the fiction, to the disclaimers and the harmless piles of paper it after all comes to, and still feel the words, still be moved and still care. Don't Try to Get to the Bottom of Things  The following excerpt is from a recent interview with Philip Roth by Asher Z. Milbauer and Donald G. Watson, which appears in ''Reading Philip Roth,'' a collection of essays they have edited to be published later this year by St. Martin's Press. We realize that you are reluctant to appear to be explicating a book prior to its publication. However, without ''explaining'' it away, can you comment generally on the unusual form for ''The Counterlife,'' which is certainly unlike anything you've done before? Normally there is a contract between the author and the reader that only gets torn up at the end of the book. In this book the contract gets torn up at the end of each chapter: a character who is dead and buried is suddenly alive, a character who is assumed to be alive is in fact dead, and so on. This is not the ordinary Aristotelian narrative that readers are accustomed to reading or that I am accustomed to writing. It isn't that it lacks a beginning, middle and ending; there are too many beginnings, middles and endings. It is a book where you never get to the bottom of things - rather than concluding with all the questions answered, at the end everything is suddenly open to question. Because one's original reading is always being challenged and the book progressively undermines its own fictional assumptions, the reader is constantly cannibalizing his own reactions. In many ways it's everything that people don't want in a novel. Primarily what they want is a story in which they can be made to believe; otherwise they don't want to be bothered. They agree, in accordance with the standard author-reader contract, to believe in the story they are being told - and then, in ''The Counterlife,'' they are being told a contradictory story. ''I'm interested in what's going on,'' says the reader, ''only now, suddenly, there are two things going on, three things going on. Which is real and which is false? Which are you asking me to believe in? Why do you bother me like this!'' Which is real and which is false? All are equally real or equally false. Which are you asking me to believe in? All/none. Why do you bother me like this? In part because there really is nothing unusual about somebody changing his story. People constantly change their story - one runs into that every day. ''But last time you told me . . .'' ''Well, that was last time -this is this time. What happened was . . .'' There is nothing ''modernist,'' ''postmodernist,'' or the least bit avant-garde about the technique. We are all writing fictitious versions of our lives all the time, contradictory but mutually entangling stories that, however subtly or grossly falsified, constitute our hold on reality and are the closest thing we have to the truth. Why do I bother you like this? Because life doesn't necessarily have a course, a simple sequence, a predictable pattern. The bothersome form is intended to dramatize that very obvious fact. The narratives are all awry but they have a unity; it is expressed in the title - the idea of a counterlife, counterlives, counterliving. Life, like the novelist, has a powerful transforming urge.
