933|1987\01\04|INWARD GAZE OF A PRIVATE EYE| THE LOCKED ROOM  ''The New York Trilogy,'' Volume 3.  By Paul Auster.  179 pp. Los Angeles:  Sun & Moon Press. $13.95.| THE LOCKED ROOM  ''The New York Trilogy,'' Volume 3.  By Paul Auster.  179 pp. Los Angeles:  Sun & Moon Press. $13.95. THE LOCKED ROOM  ''The New York Trilogy,'' Volume 3.  By Paul Auster.  179 pp. Los Angeles:  Sun & Moon Press. $13.95. THE quirky richness of Paul Auster's ''Locked Room'' took me by surprise. This is the final volume in his ''New York Trilogy,'' and the first two, ''City of Glass'' and ''Ghosts,'' left a sour, medicinal taste, as if I had swallowed something terribly good for me but not very toothsome. Widely lauded as postmodern and postexistentialist and post a few other things, these two slender novels turn the detective genre into something tonier: the gumshoes in their chilly pages keep meeting doppelgangers and spitting out references to ''Don Quixote'' and Hawthorne and Thoreau. And the more they stalk their eccentric quarry, the more they seem actually to be stalking the Big Questions - the implications of authorship, the enigmas of epistemology, the veils and masks of language. For mystery fans whose pleasure in the genre consists in putting together puzzle pieces, Mr. Auster's glassy little jigsaws can be seductive. His plots - decorated with death threats and ''dark-eyed'' women and all the other private-eye flotsam - draw one in like those of any other page-turner. But once the door bangs shut, the clue-sniffing reader finds himself on a swift elevator to a loftier plane. Soon he is deposited, still sniffing, on the heady heights of meta-fiction, where ''Who done it?'' has been transformed into ''Who's asking?'' and ''What does who done it mean, anyway?'' Mr. Auster has hit upon something. By changing the nature of the clues from the physical to the metaphysical, he harnesses the inquiring spirit any reader brings to a mystery, redirecting it from the grubby search for a wrongdoer to the more rarefied search for self. All of which is, well, awfully good for you. But my pleasure in the detective genre - and, I suspect, for many other readers as well - is not so much in putting the pieces together as in living a while with the shamus who's doing it - trying to outguess him, yes, but also boozing with him and being dazzled by his intellectual derring-do and watching him tumble for the wrong dame. The trouble with ''City of Glass'' and ''Ghosts'' is the absence of a flatfoot worth hoofing around decrepit New York with; in addition, one longs for characters more robust and more resourceful, less wan, less cipherlike. Mr. Auster is boyishly smitten with solitude. A poet, critic and translator - whose best-known previous book is, in fact, ''The Invention of Solitude'' - he has filled the trilogy's first two volumes with the depictions of lost-soul wanderings and stir-crazy journal-keeping and the disintegration of identity - stuff that makes us think our putative detective may presently strip off his disguise to reveal a neurasthenic grad student cooped up with his final thesis too long. But ''The Locked Room,'' which works best if you have read the other two books first, is a brilliant leap forward, a beguiling entertainment that accomplishes nearly everything the first two books set out to do and provides a diverting main character as well. It is the only first-person narrative in the series, and this helps enormously. Mr. Auster's philosophical asides now sound heartfelt instead of stentorian and his descents into semiological Angst feel genuinely anguished and near. The nameless narrator, whom we are meant to identify with Mr. Auster himself, is not a detective but a biographer; which is much the same thing: a chaser of facts, details, clues. The man he is researching is his recently vanished friend, Fanshawe, a golden boy who calls to mind the golden Fanshawe of Hawthorne's first novel. Hawthorne plainly viewed his solitary hero as some noble and untarnished aspect of himself, and so does our narrator, who is frequently mistaken for his old pal. But this Fanshawe's early life has been borrowed wholesale from Mr. Auster's own, so the narrator and the object of his pursuit both represent the author. In short, we are watching the writer hunt down his own identity. Missing and presumed dead, Fanshawe has left our narrator with some secret writings - writings which, when published, create a literary sensation (one wishes Mr. Auster had dared to recreate some substantial portion of them in this book). The narrator even marries Fanshawe's enchanting wife, Sophie (Hawthorne's wife, of course, was named Sophia), moving into his friend's life the way Jack Nicholson moved into the life of a dead acquaintance in Michelangelo Antonioni's movie ''The Passenger.'' With one difference: Fanshawe is alive, and only the narrator knows it. And that knowledge proves a dangerous thing. FOR Mr. Auster, writing too can be a dangerous thing. To compose a fiction is very much to be a private eye, gazing inward, investigating characters who may or may not be oneself. The closer one comes to one's hidden identity, the more harrowing the chase, and the novel's most vivid passages conjure up a true dark night of the soul. ''Something monstrous was happening, and I had no control over it anymore. The sky was growing dark inside - that much was certain; the ground was trembling. . . . I could no longer make the right distinctions. This can never be that. Apples are not oranges, peaches are not plums. . . . But everything was beginning to have the same taste to me.'' In that eloquent passage, and others like it, Mr. Auster puts his finger on the pulsing locus of language and identity. He understands that the detective of the self is trapped, forced to use that clumsiest of tools, language, to ferret out what mere language can never discover. Putting a name on something makes it at once available and all the more elusive, at once fixes it in front of us and obscures it forever. In ''The Locked Room,'' Mr. Auster proclaims the urgency of that dilemma, not just for writers but for all those who seek the truth behind the fictions they read and the fictions they live.
