934|1987\01\04|AN ICON THROUGH HISTORY| SAMBO  The Rise & Demise of an American Jester.  By Joseph Boskin.  Illustrated. 252 pp. New York:  Oxford University Press. $20.95.| SAMBO  The Rise & Demise of an American Jester.  By Joseph Boskin.  Illustrated. 252 pp. New York:  Oxford University Press. $20.95. SAMBO  The Rise & Demise of an American Jester.  By Joseph Boskin.  Illustrated. 252 pp. New York:  Oxford University Press. $20.95. UNTIL the civil rights movement helped to virtually obliterate Sambo, he was white America's favorite popular image of blacks - a stupid, winning figure, drawling, wide-grinning, eager to serve, ever ready with a song and a step, nothing if not droll. Throughout American history many whites (and even some blacks), including scientists and social scientists, have made the mistake of taking this figment of the white imagination, this Sambo, as the real, true-to-life Negro. In this intriguing, witty and often insightful social history of an image, Joseph Boskin traces Sambo to 16th-century Europe and Africa. To ''explain'' cultures different from their own, and to assuage their guilt, early European slavers created the view of Africans as ''natural slaves.'' Mr. Boskin, a professor of history and Afro-American studies at Boston University, observes that early on ''Sambo'' was used by whites as a racial label, perhaps because of its currency among Africans themselves: for the Hausa of western Africa it was a name of dignity, meaning ''name of a spirit'' and ''second son in the family''; but in the language of the Mende, also of western Africa, it was a verb meaning ''to disgrace'' or ''to be shameful.'' English slave traders probably also adopted ''Sambo'' as a form of the Hispanic slavers' insulting term ''zambo,'' meaning ''of mixed blood,'' ''bow-legged'' or ''monkey.'' Perhaps, too, since the name ''Sam'' was associated with English popular culture, ''Sambo'' rolled off British tongues with ease. From the earliest days of the slave trade, whites were intrigued by blacks as performers. Slavers' journals tell of ''dancing the slaves'' on board ships bound for the New World. This practice purportedly enhanced black spirits and health, but doubtless it also served to relieve white boredom and to ritualize black difference and powerlessness. Like these exhibitions, and like the roles foisted upon slaves in their daily relations with whites, plantation shows and contests of all sorts seemed to confirm Sambo's flesh and bone reality. In the South, Mr. Boskin writes, ''the entertaining slave was enshrined as the performer throughout the region, whether he played at the master's house or in churches, at fairs, horse races, balls, or wherever the dominant class dressed up.'' In the North, meantime, ''the counterpart of the entertaining slave eventually trooped to the theatrical stage as the minstrel man'' -curiously, the minstrel show featured, not black performers, but white men in blackface. At its height, in the decades just before and after the Civil War, ''at least thirty full-time companies performed the show. . . . Such was the international drawing power of minstrelsy that its troupers reversed the direction of the Atlantic theatrical trade and made their imprint on English and French stages.'' ''Uncle Tom shows'' (loosely combining minstrel patter with the plot of Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel) provided a popular variant of the typical minstrel fare; the veneer of religious piety played best in country towns, where the usual blackface high jinks otherwise could seem too raucously of-this-world. Mr. Boskin argues that Sambo was a kind of American jester, performing not for kings as such but for powerful whites, North and South, and occasionally expressing views which, without a wink and a hearty laugh, would have been strictly taboo. Mr. Boskin also shows that by the early 20th century Sambo was the American icon. He catalogues Sambo's appearances throughout American culture. The black figure beamed from innumerable postcards and advertisements, one of them declaring his company's product, ''The ham what am!'' Lawn furniture, tie clips and the tops of men's walking sticks showed Sambo smiling his toothiest smiles. Sambo mascots paraded the sidelines during football games; his head lighted up ''restaurants, stores, hotels, businesses, universities, and even churches.'' Sambo lived on as a radio voice in ''Amos 'n Andy'' (whose creators, writers and first performers were white) and many other shows, and eventually would become a mainstay of movies and television. Mr. Boskin observes that as the 20th century wore on, Sambo was undercut by black figures like Rochester (played by Eddie Anderson) on ''The Jack Benny Program.'' His unpredictability and back talk became principal features of the show's humor. This presaged the roles of the black comedians Godfrey Cambridge and Dick Gregory, who not only refused to play the Sambo role but were outspoken participants in the civil rights movement. Humor like theirs buoyed the spirits of rank and file activists of the 1960's, and turned the tables on those who had used Sambo against blacks. During this period, at an emotion-charged meeting following a major clash in Selma, Ala., James Forman, then executive secretary of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, told a clapping audience of black organizers, ''Yeah, there was  [ Sheriff ]  Jim Clark rubbin' his head and his big fat belly; he was shuffling today like we used to.'' Interestingly, Sambo even shuffled his way into key works of American history. Mr. Boskin takes to task the historian Ulrich B. Phillips, the South's first modern apologist for slavery, whose major works presumed that for blacks (Sambos) slavery was a civilizing process. And he stings Samuel Eliot Morison and Henry Steele Commager for the 1930 edition of their widely influential ''Growth of the American Republic,'' in which racist terms are used to describe several American groups, and where one reads of blacks in slavery: ''As for Sambo, whose wrongs moved the abolitionists to tears, there is some reason to believe that he suffered less than any other class in the South from its peculiar institution.' '' Even Constance Rourke falls back on the century-old convention in ''American Humor'' (1931), where she calls burlesque ''natural to the Negro.'' Yet Mr. Boskin offers no critique at all of Stanley Elkins, whose wrongheaded argument (in ''Slavery,'' 1959) that the slave plantations reduced most slaves to mindless ''Sambos'' (his term) was the central work provoking the contemporary revolution in the historiography of slavery. In counterpoint to Mr. Elkins, modern historians like John Blassingame, Eugene J. Genovese, Herbert Gutman, Kenneth Stampp, Lawrence Levine and many others have argued that although American slavery was crushing, somehow the slaves endured it with a significant degree of dignity. Rather than following the Elkins lead -invoking a concentration-camp tyranny over the slaves - these historians have explored the slaves' capacity to improvise, to keep something secret (a pencil, a middle name, a memory), to maintain some sense of family and community; in short, to create a world for themselves and to wait for a better day. Here the question of perspective is crucial: were the slaves history's pathetic victims, as Mr. Elkins would have it, or were they, to a significant degree, in control of their own minds, souls, and bodies, despite their caste status? Were they in any vital sense history's heroes? Mr. Elkins's critics say yes. Mr. Boskin's own thesis here situates him squarely in the outworn Elkins camp. Like Mr. Elkins, Mr. Boskin condemns but nonetheless accepts the power of slavery virtually to obliterate black culture and personality. With stereotypes and antiblack humor, Mr. Boskin argues, whites did blacks in. To Mr. Boskin, Sambo was an ''extraordinary type of social control,'' leveled with special force against black men. ''To make the black male into an object of laughter, and, conversely, to force him to devise laughter, was to strip him of masculinity, dignity, and self-possession. . . . The ultimate objective was to effect mastery: to render the black male powerless as a potential warrior, as a sexual competitor, as an economic adversary.'' A chapter called, significantly enough, ''As His Name Is, So Is He,'' discusses whites' changing blacks' names to such cruelly comic ones as ''Bituminous,'' ''Snowrilla,'' and, of course, ''Sambo.'' It clearly suggests that despite some effort to resist, finally the helpless slave victim took ''Sambo'' (or a variant) as his own real name and in his heart accepted the debased role that went with it. Mr. Boskin does not tell us that as inheritors of a tradition of mask-wearing who entered a New World full of tricks and costumes, the Africans quickly learned the survival strategy of wearing whatever mask their enslavers wished to see. The slave narratives are full of instances of blacks bowing low to whites, Sambo style, while steadily pursuing their own secret goals. Even Frederick Douglass managed to convince his owner - his last master before he took off for freedom - that he was just a happy Sambo, too contented with his place as a slave to consider another way of life. MR. BOSKIN falters, too, as an interpreter of literary texts featuring black characters. He misreads Melville's ''Benito Cereno,'' making even the black slave rebel Babo into some sort of Sambo (Captain Delano sees him that way, not Melville). Mr. Boskin seems unaware of the superb body of criticism, much of it deriving from the poet and critic Sterling A. Brown, on the complex subject of black characters as seen by white authors. In a key article written in 1933, Mr. Brown catalogues black stereotypes as follows: ''the contented slave,'' ''the wretched freedman,'' ''the comic Negro,'' ''the brute Negro,'' ''the tragic mulatto,'' ''the local color Negro'' and ''the exotic primitive.'' One of this book's prime troubles is that it attempts to deal with far too much: Sambo as icon and actual man, slave and free, in material culture and in texts, historical and literary, on stage, radio, film and television, from slavery almost to the present. But it is Mr. Boskin's insistence on the old image of blacks as crushed victims to which I object most seriously. If he is right in saying that the Sambo image did great damage to American race relations, then it is also the case that blacks' humor kept them sane, and it kept them alive. Perhaps it also kept some whites alive. As Ralph Ellison has said, ''If you can laugh at me, you don't have to kill me. If I can laugh at you, I don't have to kill you.''
