935|1987\01\04|TOTAL IMMERSION: HENRY JAMES AND MINERAL WATERS|INSPIRED by the current Henry James revival, I decided to reread ''The Ambassadors,'' the masterpiece of his later period. I'm ready at last for the late James, I thought. To go back to him is also to reread oneself.|INSPIRED by the current Henry James revival, I decided to reread ''The Ambassadors,'' the masterpiece of his later period. I'm ready at last for the late James, I thought. To go back to him is also to reread oneself. INSPIRED by the current Henry James revival, I decided to reread ''The Ambassadors,'' the masterpiece of his later period. I'm ready at last for the late James, I thought. To go back to him is also to reread oneself. There's no difficulty with the early novels, ''The American'' or ''Portrait of a Lady.'' But when it comes to the later books, people boast of being unable to read them, as if their refusal showed how real, how vital, they were. Yet to me taking on James is a heroic act, like scaling a cliff. After everything else, there's James, like an ultimatum, forbidding us to fall short, to disappoint great expectations. The first time I saw Monet's ''Water Lilies'' in the Jeu de Paume, a wistful question formed in my mind: why shouldn't painting be satisfied with this? And James's novels evoke a similar feeling -couldn't we stop art right there? He seized on human personality at the pinnacle of its refinement - middle-class men and women behaving like gods. He raised ordinary social convention to the level of a beautiful anxiety. In James's world, responsibility is glory. ''The Ambassadors'' is the purest James. Strether, a cultivated middle-aged American, goes to Paris to rescue and bring back to New England a young man who is leading a life of alleged moral ambiguity, compounded perhaps with a suggestion of esthetic licentiousness. From the very first page I loved the book as if I hadn't read it before. One never remembers great books adequately. It may be that the candor of contemporary literature creates a nostalgia for indirection, obliquity and deferral. Waiting used to be necessary to gratification. After the simple declarative sentences of so much current writing, I felt that James had restored the wide margins, the footnotes, parentheses and punctuation to our text. His attention to his characters reminded me of Marvell's lover, who tells his mistress that he will devote ''An age at least to every part'' for ''You deserve this state; / Nor would I love at lower rate.'' In talking to his friend Miss Gostrey, Strether carries politeness to the pitch of mysticism. His correctness is almost a delirium, and his end runs around his conscience are as dazzling as Tony Dorsett's or Joe Morris's. Strether's deliberations are like psychoanalysis freed from sex, floating like a balloon. His scruples are a religion liberated from God. For James, a decision is not so much a plan for action as a melodrama. In ''A Barbarian in Asia,'' the French poet Henri Michaux observed that while Westerners habitually divide things into halves, Hindus separate them into 16, 32, 64 or 128 parts. So does James. When Strether is tempted to leave the young man as he is, his debate with himself is worthy of a medieval casuist looking for loopholes in dogma. Perhaps Freud had James in mind when he wrote his essay on ''Analysis Terminable and Interminable.'' A beggar in the street once asked me for money and because he was somehow appealing, I gave it to him. But that wasn't what he really wanted: as he held out his hand, he murmured in an apologetic voice, ''I don't suppose you have time to listen to my story?'' Do we have time for James's stories? Of course we do, but that's not the real question. I think that our difficulty with James stems from the fact that we can't stand to see mere human creatures - who are not in dire circumstances - shown so much patience and given so much importance. It offends our democracy, turns us indignant. The contemporary novel encourages us to understand or forgive rather than to exalt, and James's respect for our species makes us uncomfortable. In a peculiar way, it's like being loved without being desired. We're not sure we can live up to it. Paris now has a water bar, the Bar a Eaux on Rue Nicolo in the 16th arrondissement. The Bar serves 130 varieties of water and no alcoholic drinks. Its motto is ''La vie en pleine harmonie,'' or life in full harmony. While the Bar a Eaux undoubtedly originated in the notion that French livers are in danger, some observers feel the threat has simply been shifted onto the shoulders of French literature, which, as everyone knows, depends for its inspiration on the cafe. The issue is already being debated in the feuilletons. Here, for example, is an editorial from Enficeler, a Parisian journal whose title, an untranslatable Gallic pun, literally means ''to tie up with string'': ''This threatened sobriety, this water torture, goes against the very grain of French genius. It is not for nothing that France resisted running water in its homes longer than any other great civilization. The water bar is our Waterloo; French literature is as good as washed up, its dry wit squelched and sodden. Without his litre, his fine, his flagon, the Frenchman is an anonymous alcoholic. ''This proposed flushing can only be a foreign infusion. It was the infamous American expatriate, Henry Miller, who wrote of 'the pleasant sound of water running in the urinals.' But that is not our conception of glory, that! Ah, no, our own Verlaine was closer to the mark when he said 'It weeps in my heart / As it rains on the town.' ''French letters will not go willingly to a watery grave! You can lead a Frenchman to water, but you cannot make him drink! Blood is thicker than Perrier!'' A rival journal, L'Epiloir (another undecodable joke: literally ''tweezer''), took a more positive view: ''What has been lacking in French literature since the time of Racine and Lamartine is precisely the 'oceanic feeling,' a sense of limitlessness or unboundedness, of oneness with the universe. Without this, the writer is merely a fish out of water. Nothing swells the stream of consciousness like water; it thins the bile for which our literature is notorious. It is clarity, flow; water-inspired writing seeks its own level in the reader. ''One dampens clothes before ironing them, in order to make them supple and pliant: can we do less for literature? It is not accident that modern art developed in the Bateau Lavoir, the laundry boat of Montmartre. The Bible tells us to cast our bread upon the waters. Writing of the flood in Paris in 1955, Roland Barthes observed that 'perception is flabbergasted . . . our gaze is swept into an endless dilution.' Could one ask for a better definition of the modern? Just as painting has its watercolors, so literature will have its water writing. ''Nothing in psychology is so soothing to the unfortunate madman as hydrotherapy, the immersion in a genial element. Can anything compare with water for sheer entertainment? We need only see it to experience an irresistible desire to plunge. ''There is a tide in the minds of men, a time to sink or swim. The literature of France has a parched tongue: like Hugo's hunchback Quasimodo, it cries out for the mercy of water. Laved in water, billowing, our belles-lettres will shine like Joan of Arc in a wet T-shirt. Like kings, French writers will be able to say 'Apres moi le deluge!' ''. With this issue, About Books becomes a weekly feature of The Book Review. Anatole Broyard will be joined by Denis Donoghue, who holds the Henry James Chair of Letters at New York University; Cynthia Ozick, the novelist and essayist, whose latest novel, ''The Messiah of Stockholm,'' will be published in March; and Marilynne Robinson, author of the novel ''Housekeeping,'' who is at work on a nonfiction book about Britain. ABOUT BOOKS
