938|1987\01\04|MODERNISM AND OTHER MODERNISMS| MODERN AMERICAN RELIGION  Volume One: The Irony of It All. 1893-1919.  By Martin E. Marty.  Illustrated. 386 pp. Illinois:  University of Chicago Press. $24.95.| MODERN AMERICAN RELIGION  Volume One: The Irony of It All. 1893-1919.  By Martin E. Marty.  Illustrated. 386 pp. Illinois:  University of Chicago Press. $24.95. MODERN AMERICAN RELIGION  Volume One: The Irony of It All. 1893-1919.  By Martin E. Marty.  Illustrated. 386 pp. Illinois:  University of Chicago Press. $24.95. WHAT narrative on the grand scale was to historical writing in the 19th century, synthesis on the grand scale has been to historical writing in the 20th. To explain a big, complicated, confusing period or topic with penetrating ideas and elegant associations has led to greatest honor and recognition among historians, widest impact on students and the reading public, and even occasional influence on political debate and policy making. Among American historians the best examples of renowned synthesizers are Frederick Jackson Turner, who first propounded his ''frontier thesis'' in 1893; Charles A. Beard, who held forth on his economic interpretation from the 1910's to the 40's; Richard Hofstadter, who presented his social and cultural analysis in the 50's and 60's, and C. Vann Woodward, who continues to argue for a complex, ironic view of the role of the South. Curiously, American religion during the last century has thus far resisted efforts at synthesis, despite Reinhold Niebuhr's fertile suggestions about ''irony'' in the history of a powerful nation dominated by beliefs and values derived from Protestantism. Martin E. Marty seeks to fill this gap with this book and three succeeding volumes, which are projected to cover the whole 20th century. The title of the entire work, ''Modern American Religion,'' conveys his governing interpretation: religion, which encompasses more than Christian churches and formal worship, encountered the characteristic aspects of modern life, particularly science and technology, in the United States in strikingly different ways than in the rest of the world, especially in Europe. The title of this volume, ''The Irony of It All,'' conveys his main angle of attack: this American encounter between religion and modernity is best understood from the perspective of irony, which he openly borrows from Niebuhr. The project has great promise. Unfortunately, this volume delivers much less than I hoped to find. Beginning at the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893, which witnessed both Turner's delivery of his thesis and the World's Parliament of Religions, Mr. Marty - a professor at the University of Chicago, which also opened in 1893, right next to the exposition's midway - tracks the relationship between religion and modernity to the end of World War I. He divides his cast of characters into five groups - ''modernists,'' mostly white Protestant clergymen who affected an accommodation with science; ''moderns,'' secular thinkers and social activists who expressed a deep need to replace their now defunct Protestant faiths with some comparable worldly idealism; ''antimoderns,'' Roman Catholics, Orthodox Jews, ethnically based Protestants and blacks, who rejected modernism as either irrelevant or socially threatening; ''countermoderns,'' mainly the conservative Protestants who came to be called fundamentalists, who fought modernism on theological grounds; and ''transmoderns,'' such as Christian Scientists and Seventh-day Adventists, who emphasized community and the immediacy of faith, often with interests in the therapeutic aspects of religion. Mr. Marty's categorization makes sense of some murky, often deliberately obfuscated controversies. It also enables him to touch on virtually every aspect of religious life in his period. His book falls short, however, as both synthesis and narrative. The problem is not that Mr. Marty has tried to achieve a 20th-century end through 19th-century means. If he had tried that, he might have written a narrative that gave a sense of the heat and passion of the times and rendered judgments on what he regards as the most important events and movements. Instead, he approaches the subject with a textbook writer's purpose and a late 20th-century liberal's social agenda. Hispanics, Asians, women, Mormons, Pentecostals and just about everybody else get some discussion in a historical application of the equal-time rule. But such social ecumenism does not compensate for failing to treat at length, for example, the fierce interdenominational and intradenominational battles during World War I between military enthusiasts and pacifists, or the political involvement of such Social Gospel clergymen as Washington Gladden, or the ordeal of Norman Thomas in his metamorphosis during the war from Presbyterian pastor to socialist leader. THE synthesis does not hold up because the book's central ideas are too weak to bear the weight that is put on them. Not only is ''modernity'' an ill-defined concept, but encounters between religion and secular thought have occurred throughout recorded history. Why did a clash between them become so acute during the latter half of the 19th century? Why did both that confrontation and other religiously based impulses spill over into so much of society during the first part of this century? Why were the manifestations of these developments, as Mr. Marty observes, so different in America and Europe? Mr. Marty's invocation of irony does not offer much insight. Despite several lengthy, lecturish disquisitions on irony, he can only offer Niebuhr's example and cite the ability to sympathize with several sides of conflicts as reasons for making it the basis of the book. Irony seems more an artificial device imposed from without than something that the particular time, place and people demand for illumination. In all, this is a useful but disappointing book. Mr. Marty's subsequent volumes may prove more satisfying. ''Conflict replaces irony as the major theme in the next three decades,'' he notes in anticipation. Good. That ought to make for a juicier story. Mr. Marty also promises to include discussions of prohibition and feminism in the next volume. I hope so. Their omission from this book not only impoverishes its story but also slights two of the most important public questions that have religious dimensions during the first 20 years of this century. If he treats those topics and others of similar moment, such as fundamentalism, war and peace, and civil rights; if he exercises a newly found selectivity and willingness to take his stand; and if he thinks through what he is really interpreting - then Mr. Marty may yet produce a narrative and a synthesis worthy of his great subject.
