939|1987\01\04|PRESENT AT THE CREATION, REPEATEDLY| CHOURA  The Memoirs of Alexandra Danilova.  Illustrated. 213 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $20.| CHOURA  The Memoirs of Alexandra Danilova.  Illustrated. 213 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $20. CHOURA  The Memoirs of Alexandra Danilova.  Illustrated. 213 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $20. ''WHEN I was born, my city was called St. Petersburg. While I was in school, it was called Petrograd. By the time I left Russia, in 1924, it was called Leningrad.'' So begins ''Choura,'' the long-awaited memoirs of Alexandra Danilova, prima ballerina of the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo. This is the story of an orphan who grew up to become an international star. As light as a souffle and as warm and faceted as a ruby, ''Choura'' is filled with trenchant commentary on the development and the personalities of 20th-century ballet. As Mme. Danilova observes, ''The capital of the ballet world has in my lifetime moved from St. Petersburg to New York City, and I have been one of the few to witness every stage of the shift.'' She trained at the Maryinsky Theater in St. Petersburg and went on to dance with Serge Diaghilev, Col. W. de Basil and innumerable and colorful small companies throughout the world. Mme. Danilova is now a teacher at the School of American Ballet, where she passes along the grand traditions of the classical ballet. She lived with and loved George Balanchine, whose progress as a choreographer she traces here. And ''Choura'' is crammed with delicious and revealing anecdotes about other important and notorious figures, including Igor Stravinsky, Leonide Massine, Coco Chanel and Zelda Fitzgerald. Mme. Danilova touches on a wide range of subjects, from the quality of ballet costumes and curtain bows to women choreographers, the concept of an ideal ballerina and the training of ballet company managers. She has wise things to say about teaching a new generation of dancers, and her analysis of the performer's responsibility ought to be engraved over every theater dressing room. There are glimpses of great loneliness here, endured with the kind of wit that can describe the legendary Vaslav Nijinsky as the Kilroy of ballet history. ''Choura'' is a classic - perfect for anyone who loves dance.
