94|1987\01\01|New Year's Wishes|On the morning after, it's time for some New Year's sports wishes:|On the morning after, it's time for some New Year's sports wishes: On the morning after, it's time for some New Year's sports wishes: One, now that Ray Perkins is the Tampa Bay Bucs' new coach and vice president of operations, that he no longer be allowed to play with matches. In leaving the Giants for the University of Alabama as Bear Bryant's successor four years ago, and in leaving Tuscaloosa now, he has burned two bridges in his search for the ideal job. ''I've never been satisfied in my life,'' he once said, ''and I hope I never am.'' But for the moment, Perkins surely is satisfied with the quarterback whom the Bucs surely will take with the first choice in the National Football League draft - Vinny Testaverde, the Heisman Trophy winner. But would Perkins have taken the Bucs' job if they weren't assured of selecting the University of Miami passer? Two, that the Rose, the Orange, the Sugar and the Cotton Bowls form the opening round of an eight-team college football playoff format toward a national championship. The four winning teams would advance to the semifinals that would determine the two teams for the title game. Of all the bowl games this time, only tomorrow night's Sunkist Fiesta Bowl between Miami and Penn State will be accepted as having defined the nation's best team. As a result, the four traditional bowls have dissolved this time into exhibitions for television programming and excuses for a vacation for students, alumni and boosters. If the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl scenario for No. 1 develops again next year, the four traditional bowls will be forced to rethink their positions on a national championship playoff. Up to now, the traditional bowls have resisted proposals that they form the opening round of a playoff. Each bowl always hopes to put together what the Tempe, Ariz., promoters did - the No. 1 and No. 2-ranked teams. If the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl turns out to be a onetime happening in college football's annual search for No. 1, the traditional bowls won't surrender their alliances with the major conference champions. But if the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl attracts another showdown for No. 1 next year between two independents, the traditional bowls might realize that four first-round playoff games are more meaningful than four empty exhibitions. More meaningful games also will attract more meaningful television dollars, as Miami and Penn State learned. Miami and Penn State each will take home $2.4 million, more than each of the Super Bowl XXI teams, not counting the pro players' shares. At the Super Bowl, each of the winning players will collect $36,000 from the National Football League office, each of the losing players $18,000 - a total of at least $1.8 million and $900,000 for the players on the winning and losing teams, based on 50 shares per team. The winning Super Bowl franchise itself will receive $1.32 million and the losing franchise $960,000 to cover the shares for coaches and front-office personnel as well as expenses, aside from air fare. With this year's game at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., each team will receive the value of 100 first-class round-trip tickets between Los Angeles and its home-area airport. The clubs apply that air fare money toward chartered jets. Three, that the N.F.L. acknowledge at least partial responsibility for the use of steroids among college football players. Year after year, the N.F.L. has talked about how its athletes are ''bigger, stronger and faster,'' but some of those bigger, stronger and faster athletes didn't get that way just by lifting weights. Perhaps in the hope of adding strength and bulk in order to attract N.F.L. scouts, some college players have used steroids, as the National Collegiate Athletic Association tests have shown. And who knows how many other players have used steroids? According to Commissioner Pete Rozelle, when the N.F.L. begins testing for steroids at its training camps this summer, it will rely on education and rehabilitation for those who test positive. But what happens to a repeat offender? Four, that Don King, the boxing promoter, be prohibited from promoting a fight involving any boxer managed by his son, Carl. The New York State Athletic Commission is now under investigation by the state's Inspector General's Office over allegations that Carl King managed both James (Bonecrusher) Smith and Tim Witherspoon in their recent World Boxing Association heavyweight title bout at Madison Square Garden. But the answer is not merely to determine if Carl King managed both fighters. The answer is to prevent relatives of any promoter from managing any fighters on that promoter's cards. ''When you're a manager, you do what's best for your fighter,'' Witherspoon's trainer, Slim Jim Robinson, said after his Witherspoon was dethroned in a first-round knockout. ''Not what's best for the promoter.'' ''When we talked with Don King before the fight,'' Witherspoon said of a meeting with the promoter, ''Carl sat on Smith's side of the table. Carl was not there on behalf of me, but on behalf of his own blood.'' But a blood-relative rule in New York boxing wouldn't prevent Carl King from managing fighters on Don King's cards elsewhere unless other major boxing states, especially Nevada and New Jersey, adopted a similar rule. If boxing is ever abolished, it will be for what happens outside the ring, not in it. SPORTS OF THE TIMES
