941|1987\01\04|ATTENTION: 'COMPOSE. INVENT!'| THE COLLECTED POEMS  OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS  Volume One: 1909-1939.  Edited by A. Walton Litz  and Christopher MacGowan.  579 pp. New York:  New Directions. $35.| THE COLLECTED POEMS  OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS  Volume One: 1909-1939.  Edited by A. Walton Litz  and Christopher MacGowan.  579 pp. New York:  New Directions. $35. THE COLLECTED POEMS  OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS  Volume One: 1909-1939.  Edited by A. Walton Litz  and Christopher MacGowan.  579 pp. New York:  New Directions. $35. WALT WHITMAN prophesied that the United States was too immense, unprecedented, strange and fragmented to be held together by anything but poetry. The American poet since Whitman whose work most wholeheartedly takes up that vision of poetry as a central national art is William Carlos Williams. This beautifully edited collection gives the poems from the first half of his career in restored chronological order, including uncollected poems as well as separate volumes, with indexes of titles and first lines, the original contents pages and helpful notes by the editors. Today, more than 100 years since Williams's birth and nearly 25 since his death, his poetry more than ever embodies the scope and freshness that go with such surviving, if threatened, ideals as democratic culture, modern art and the New World. Williams was an experimental artist in the generation that forced new perceptions of reality on the world - and he was also a medical doctor with a long, busy career in his hometown of Rutherford, N.J. That is, he lived and worked at the center of American life, and also in the orbit of the radical avant-garde. Like no other American modernist, he knew the daily life, the speech and manners, of working-class, lower-middle-class and middle-class Americans. He knew the life of a town, a city and a region, and he brought some of the cool, arrogant detachment sometimes associated with his profession to that life. As a writer, he approached it and its physical setting with a kind of antagonistic relish, seeing his culture confidently from inside, yet from the unsettling angle of a great formal innovator and a severe critic. Because of this unique vision from within and without, Williams's art provides a continuing challenge. His influence has been immense, but his model has yet to be completely appreciated. In that sense, I think, he is still an innovator, an artist whose work helps point toward the future. For him, originality of technique and the ambition to write a poetry of American life in language based on American idiom embodied a single, unified project. That unity of purpose is everywhere in this book. Williams wrote poems that were conscious lessons-by-example in the making of free verse, in ways that were at the same time lessons in his kind of attention:  TO A POOR OLD WOMAN  munching a plum on  the street a paper bag  of them in her hand  They taste good to her  They taste good  to her. They taste  good to her  You can see it by  the way she gives herself  to the one half  sucked out in her hand  Comforted  a solace of ripe plums  seeming to fill the air  They taste good to her The homely phrase ''They taste good to her'' moves through the different emphases of its four repetitions as if Dr. Williams were using a pointer or brilliant audio-visual aid to teach us all what lines are, and why one would write in them. First we get the five-word phrase in its whole prosaic form. Then the analytic effect of cadence and line cutting across the sentence brings out the mysterious process of syntax, stressing first the predicate adjective ''good,'' then the verb ''taste'' with the pronoun ''they'' as its subject (the word ''plums'' does not appear until two stanzas later) and at the end of the stanza the isolated phrase ''good to her.'' When the repeated sentence comes back in the last line, fitted entire into a line again, it is transformed. Rhythm and repetition have brought back to life the force and elegance inside a simple phrase. But the restored process of language is only part of what the poem accomplishes. There are some plums, and a woman, and they taste good to her. The repetitions have a moral force, made explicit by the phrase ''You can see it.'' The taking in of supposedly ordinary experience is Williams's great subject, and the energy lurking inside the adjective ''good'' or inside the syntax coursing through five monosyllables indicates the energy of the senses, a force so powerful that you can see it in another person. The almost hectoring repetition becomes a way of saying how simple such seeing is, and how difficult: if you pay attention, you can see the emotional shape enclosed in a phrase so it seems to fill the air. That is, you can see not merely a scene containing a character and plums, but the process of the plums tasting good to her. If you pay sufficient attention, you may even devise a way to say it as plainly as you see it, making the most ordinary materials - ''they taste good,'' a small child could say it; ''poor old woman,'' it is what anyone might call her - memorable. The example set by such poems sheds a harsh, impartial light over various kinds of contemporary taste in poetry. I mean, in one direction, the limp, rhythmless poems in short prosy lines that dribble down the pages of magazines, often a poetry based on the notation of observed details, and in another direction, forced, lurching, unidiomatic work in rhyme and more or less iambic meter, often a poetry of wit. Both modes, in relation to Williams's project, underestimate the multiple demands of experience and form, idiom and attention. I think people tolerate such things because, although many like the idea of poetry, few hope to feel much excitement about a poem. The taut, syncopated movement of Williams's poem generates an excitement that reminds us what poems can do. How can one define that movement? Williams's accomplishment has sometimes been confused with a kind of verbal photography, as if the point were to depict physical realities or visual impressions in words. But his famous slogan ''(No ideas but in things)'' was not ''No ideas, but things.'' And in context, the phrase is not only bracketed by parentheses but surrounded by dynamic one-word sentences: ''Compose.'' ''Invent!'' The emphasis is on motion and energy, not depiction. He characteristically builds observation and ''concrete'' diction toward the attainment of an emotional process or idea, such as ''solace'' - the apparent ''abstraction'' or directly named feeling that flowers out of all the careful attention given words for what can be seen, smelled and touched. SWIFT movement between image and idea in the poems corresponds to the restless play among kinds of language - for example, between Latinate vocabulary and formal syntax (his careful subjunctives, or the occasional first-person ''shall'') on one side, and on the other plain American words and constructions. This movement, too, is both a formal principle and a thematic (even, in a way, a political) matter. The underlying conception of the United States as a source for the material, as well as the language, of poetry was no bland celebration of national life, nor was the Williams verbal style a mere wholesale, softening adaptation of colloquial language. His language is not the sentimental, static adaptation of American idiom of, say, Sandburg's ''Chicago,'' but an ever-shifting, eclectic experiment in daring blends and savage, unexpected harmonies. Similarly, Williams presents an America that is provisional, still unmade, even terrifying in its rawness. ''The pure products of America / go crazy,'' begins one of his most famous, and darkest, poems. Movement and speed, for good or ill, characterize both this vision of reality and the poet's stylistic response. He delighted in noting and discovering manners as a living flux, and around 1916 ended a poem (''The Young Housewife'') with the lines - The noiseless wheels of my car  rush with a crackling sound over  dried leaves as I bow and pass smiling.  - observing the little nod we make with the steering wheel in our hands, the old European court gesture in its new vernacular setting: the car; the street; a thrill-Continued on page 20 ing, ruthless efficiency of motion; and the self-consciously libidinous doctor looking at a young housewife at the curb, with similes for her in his head as he passes over the leaves in his heedlessly rushing contraption. But description falls short of Williams's poems because the language he wrote in was like his conception of the country - not only provisional, but alertly inventing itself as it went. Thus, any simple alternation would be too mechanical for the exuberant, testy energy that delighted in pitching formality and high language against, and into and around, their supposed opposites so resourcefully and with such cunning surface innocence that high and low, formal and informal, cannot be told apart:  FINE WORK WITH PITCH AND COPPER  Now they are resting  in the fleckless light  separately in unison  like the sacks  of sifted stone stacked  regularly by twos  about the flat roof  ready after lunch  to be opened and strewn  The copper in eight  foot strips has been  beaten lengthwise  down the center at right  angles and lies ready  to edge the coping  One still chewing  picks up a copper strip  and runs his eye along it This is entirely an account of the roofer's work and yet also of the work of the poet who runs his eye along the scene. The two stanzas about the beaten copper strips perform the trope of poetry delighting in its own difficulty of composition, like the lines in Yeats's ''Adam's Curse'' about how hard it is to write verse that sounds natural or Ben Jonson's lines about revision in his elegy on Shakespeare. Without mentioning poetry or himself or neglecting the roofers, Williams conveys all this by implication, partly through combining disparate kinds of word. ''Fleckless light'' is elevated and poetic, whereas ''separately in unison'' is obsessively precise, and while ''coping'' and ''eight foot strips'' are technical in another way, it is hard to say if ''strewn'' is archaic and high like ''fleckless'' - or the most technical term of all, a part of the sweet old jargon of the crafts and trades, and their techniques. THE gesture of picking up the stuff of work while still chewing, like the bow while driving the car, makes a spontaneous, graceful transition between formality and improvisation, necessity and pleasure. On their level, the gestures embody the fluid, inspired invention that was the poet's central esthetic principle, and a kind of ethical or political ideal as well. That ideal has something to do with the way works of art imply whom art belongs to, and the poetry in this volume conveys that its radically fresh art belongs somehow to us who live the actual American life Williams's poetry comes from, and calls to account. It is as if he urges us to be both at home with our materials and ''still chewing,'' impatient to transform them. The early pages of this book trace the development of an indigenous American avant-garde style, a unique modernist accomplishment that embraces all of the poet's intelligence along with all of his American experience. That accomplishment should embody a standard for any living American poet who sets out to write, whether in elegant stanzas or jagged ones. From around 1914 on, Williams's work attained an implied critique of our culture that still penetrates in a special way because it comes from within, not from the more European or global perspective of Pound and Eliot. By bringing together his stringent idea of art and a transforming vision into the ordinary, Williams by 1939 had set a continuing, essential challenge for American readers and poets.
