942|1987\01\04|THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING LEARNED| TIME AND THE WHITE TIGRESS  By Mary Barnard.  Illustrated by Anita Bigelow.  79 pp. Portland, Ore.:  Breitenbush Books. Cloth, $20. Paper, $8.95.| TIME AND THE WHITE TIGRESS  By Mary Barnard.  Illustrated by Anita Bigelow.  79 pp. Portland, Ore.:  Breitenbush Books. Cloth, $20. Paper, $8.95. TIME AND THE WHITE TIGRESS  By Mary Barnard.  Illustrated by Anita Bigelow.  79 pp. Portland, Ore.:  Breitenbush Books. Cloth, $20. Paper, $8.95. CIVIL BLOOD  By Jill Breckenridge.  Illustrated by R. W. Scholes.  212 pp. Minneapolis:  Milkweed Editions.  Cloth, $19.50. Paper, $9.50. ARTS & SCIENCES  By Albert Goldbarth.  107 pp. Princeton, N.J.:  Ontario Review Press.  Cloth, $17.95. Paper, $8.95. MANY poets in the United States now seem to assume that their art does not require much book learning, and may even suffer from it. They have not been deprived of education themselves, but perhaps they feel they can write on behalf of the unlettered and unrepresented, even though the intellectual naivete of their work vitiates its social and political impact. Three new books of poems are distinctive in their erudition. Mary Barnard published a volume of essays on early astronomical systems (''The Mythmakers'') 20 years before distilling her research in the poems of ''Time and the White Tigress.'' Jill Breckenridge spent eight years studying the historical record of the Civil War in order to write the narrative poem ''Civil Blood.'' And Albert Goldbarth inspected a rich, if fragmentary, assortment of ''curiosities,'' from Leonardo's map of the river networks of Tuscany to biographies of Christopher Columbus, to write the candidly titled ''Arts & Sciences.'' The 12 sections of Ms. Barnard's book treat common themes in astronomical systems of the north temperate zone - Babylonian and Egyptian, Greek and Roman, Chinese, Mayan and Islamic. The 60 pages of poems, with handsome linocuts by Anita Bigelow, are supplemented by almost 20 pages of notes. The notes are a useful ornament, not an intrusion. They explain that people have seen the ''sphere of the fixed stars'' divided by great circles - in which the Earth and the celestial bodies, including the visible Milky Way, all move and which have been used to explain the seasons and the changing position of sunrise on the horizon; that, for settled tribes, reliably indicates solstice and equinox. In a sky thus ordered, constellations precipitate like crystals - the Great Bear, which never sets around the fixed point of the North Pole; the zodiac, which populates the ecliptic plane, spinning backward through its houses. Ms. Barnard also provides a great deal of information in her poems, but her explanations of how customs and calendars, mythology and mathematics, arise in relation to stargazing are not in the least prosaic. On every page her habitual iambic pentameter, slightly roughened for variety's sake, builds to passages of great lyrical purity. In the fifth section, for example, she describes how discrepancies resulting from the superposition of solar on lunar year-counts generate festival days during which, paradoxically, time ceases in order to realign itself:  The thirteenth moon remained as a handful of days  when time stood still, and the moon caught up with the sun -  a dozen days at the year's end; this was the epact,  an interregnum, when, through a twelve-day chink  in the calendar, beings from outside time slipped in,  when mummers paraded, chain-dancing from door to door,  when Father Liber was king and the servant was  master. Human ritual behavior is the heart of our sociability, in which we affirm our loves, limit our capacity for destruction and re-create the forms of common life. Ms. Barnard reveals how thoroughly ritual has always depended on astronomical arrangements of the world: at last  the universe is in order. We know where we are.  When we build our hogans and temples, or bury our  dead  we know how to place them in space and in time. Her depiction of archaic astronomy as the orderly matrix of ritual is passionately compelling. Yet she never lets us forget how arcane and impersonal a study astronomy is. Our ancestors were not studying false objects, gods and goddesses, the stars, or really any objects at all. They were discovering and inventing systemic patterns, orientations and rangings that cannot be seen but only inferred.  The planet is never the goddess.  The brilliant, mysterious point of light  appearing and disappearing,  always keeping close to the sun,  is but one epiphany  marking the times of her ascendancy. The principles of order brought to life in Ms. Barnard's book are at once highly abstract and of the greatest human import, and this must account for the warmth and drama of her wholly impersonal style. ''Civil Blood'' by Jill Breckenridge is a long narrative poem, with some interludes of prose, about two men, Cabell and Jacob, caught up in the Civil War. Cabell is based on John Cabell Breckinridge, an ambivalent Kentucky slaveholder, Vice President of the United States under President Buchanan and a Confederate general. Jacob, Cabell's slave and childhood companion, seems both less typical and less individuated than Cabell, though perhaps he is also based on a real person. In the first and most lyrical of the book's four sections, their two voices alternately tell stories of childhood, early manhood and marriage, and of the outbreak of the war. The second part concerns the war itself, reported mostly in Cabell's voice, with authorial asides and documentary ventriloquism. The final parts trace Cabell's escape from the defeated South and his exile, pardon and eventual return to Kentucky, where he and Jacob, who has also come home, live out their days. Cabell's story has the force of verisimilitude, although it hovers uneasily between literary narrative and historiography. As if resurrected from patchy historical records, it includes tangential allegiances and twists of fate only loosely related to its general drift. Yet in certain cases, Ms. Breckenridge observes the dramatic unities by consciously distorting historical fact. Cabell's half-dozen military engagements are conflated into a single archetype, the description of which contains some of the author's most powerfully critical writing. Here she recounts the slaughter of horses in terms that recall the formulaic and yet horribly graphic battle scenes of the ''Iliad'': ''over the hard ground toward the stream where a hundred artillery horses tied halter to halter lower their big heads to drink, and I must shoot them, every one, kill the dapple gray, who goes down on one knee, kill the bay, who, mouth open, rears, black mane and tail flying, sprays blood from its mouth in a final red flag. . . .'' The figure of Jacob is less plausible than Cabell, especially when read in the context of 19th-century slave narratives. The poignant testimony of Frederick Douglass's experience with the Aulds of Baltimore is that the institution of slavery, ''the fatal poison of irresponsible power,'' corrupted even the kindliest souls, making them petty tyrants with whom true intimacy was impossible. Ms. Breckenridge portrays the psychology of domination very well when Cabell and Jacob get into mischief together as children. Cabell blames Jacob, who is beaten, and then rebuffs his pathetic attempt at reconciliation:  He tries a little smile  on me, but I'll have none  of it, scowl hard at him  over the candle's pale flicker,  a look I hope he knows  means he must never  do such a thing again.  Never again. Yet after his wife and child are killed in an unsuccessful attempt to escape, Jacob's primary emotional bond is to Cabell, whom he follows around for the rest of his life. Resettled in postwar Kentucky, Jacob mentions that he taught reading and writing to his fellow freedmen until stopped by the Klan, but his ''master'' is his only living intimate. What Douglass tells us, by contrast, is that his fiercest love and longstanding devotion belonged to the fellow slaves with whom he risked his life to share the potent secret of literacy. Albert Goldbarth writes long poems with long lines full of descriptive detail. In ''Arts & Sciences,'' whenever he begins an argument or narrative, he is sooner or later diverted by the superabundance of language and the cornucopiousness of the world. The people in his poems (one is always himself) either produce clutter or notice dozens of modulations in the objects or situations surrounding them - or, if they don't, he notices for them. His poems always have multiple topics. Thus a poem about Leigh Hunt's collection of famous locks of hair includes John Bartram, an 18th-century New World collector for a London merchant-botanist, and it interrupts and elaborates his tale with lists of his finds: ''shooting star, white osier, bittersweet, steeplebush, / arrowroot, river birch, witch hazel, sassafras.'' The list continues for eight more lines. To make works of art out of such heterogeneous material, a poet needs a strategy of unification. Mr. Goldbarth's usual strategy is to construct his poems as what Alastair Reid calls garlands. He starts off with one topic, moves on to a second and third through a some-Continued on page 24 times illuminating, sometimes arbitrary process of association, and keeps moving. By the time a reader has arrived at the last topics, he or she has forgotten all about the first, to which Mr. Goldbarth invariably returns just at the end so that the shock of recognition produces an impression - sometimes an illusion -that there is a unity in the assemblage. When successful, Mr. Goldbarth's end-linked collages generate suggestive symmetries and important questions. In ''The Elements,'' he begins by describing the composition of a Dutch still life with loving subtlety:  If the dull swell of a herring on a plate picks up  red chevrons meaning a candle (out of sight) is lit,  the crystal of burgundy weighting another corner is  given a small red heart of light at its center so  everything, in shape and weight, is balanced. Then he switches to brutal and sad vignettes of Vietnam, before he returns to the painting in a series of questions about how the ''order and abidingness'' of art bear on human suffering. Elsewhere even Mr. Goldbarth seems uncertain about where his digressive circling leads. One section of a long prose poem ends: ''There are drawings on walls from then we still can't read, long letters to God or amatory verses to somebody's rosebud lips. And this could be a battery cell from the year of Christ's birth. Miltie's. The Rialto. Nobody knows what it means.'' The next, final section of the same poem gives examples of various kinds of social behavior in animals and in people, which, his juxtaposition of them suggests, all constitute the same togetherness under the rubric of ''committees.'' Mr. Goldbarth must have read quite a bit of natural history to find these examples, but he has missed an important function of science, and discursive thought generally, which is to make discriminations when and where they are needed. Why confound the differences between flocking animals and animals that bond as individuals, between the inherent rituals that link certain animals and the learned, much more fragile and constructive, rituals that unite people? Poetry can no more dispense with discrimination than science can. If, without compromising his own sense of reality's ambiguous richness, Mr. Goldbarth could make his poems more orderly and spare, they would more often be greater than the sum of their parts.
