943|1987\01\04|CRIME|Of all this decade's mystery novels involving newspapermen, and there have been many, none is more a hymn of praise than NECESSARY by Ken Jackson (St. Martin's, $15.95). Most authors invest their newsmen with cynicism. Not Mr. Jackson. He romanticizes and even sentimentalizes them. The book editor of The Tulsa World in|Of all this decade's mystery novels involving newspapermen, and there have been many, none is more a hymn of praise than NECESSARY by Ken Jackson (St. Martin's, $15.95). Most authors invest their newsmen with cynicism. Not Mr. Jackson. He romanticizes and even sentimentalizes them. The book editor of The Tulsa World in Of all this decade's mystery novels involving newspapermen, and there have been many, none is more a hymn of praise than NECESSARY by Ken Jackson (St. Martin's, $15.95). Most authors invest their newsmen with cynicism. Not Mr. Jackson. He romanticizes and even sentimentalizes them. The book editor of The Tulsa World in Oklahoma, he loves everything about newspapers, and he especially loves the newsroom, whence reporters depart with their assignments and return to write stories that once in a while can shake their locality and even the nation. In this book his hero has the unlikely name of Nathan Necessary. Necessary, once a top investigative reporter, is an alcoholic who now is a copy editor for an Oklahoma paper. He gets an anonymous tip about corruption in the county government, starts to investigate in his spare time and is scared off. In a fit of self-loathing he goes off the bottle and, with an ambitious copy boy, starts following leads and amassing evidence. Along the way there are murders and a Mafia connection, but Necessary finally gets his story. Nathan Necessary is a compilation of everything that the author thinks a great reporter should be. Unfortunately he and the other characters end up as stereotypes - the tough but understanding managing editor, the reporters motivated only by the quest for the truth, the slimy evildoers. We have seen all this on television. But throughout the book there breathes a spirit that films and television have not captured. When Mr. Jackson writes about newspapers there is actually a kind of poetry. He manages to convey the camaraderie of the newsroom, the excitement in a reporter's mind while working on a story, the ego gratification when it is a big one, the monomania a true reporter brings to his job. It is a monomania that approaches a frenzy in which girlfriends or wife, family and sleep, mean nothing when a big story is breaking. If the characters themselves are too good to be true, the newspaper itself springs vividly to life. Would that there were more of its kind in the United States. Just as ''Necessary'' is a paean to journalism, so LOW ANGLES by Jim Stinson (Scribners, $13.95) is a study of the drives that motivate film directors and editors. The central character is Stoney Winston, who made his first appearance in 1985 in ''Double Exposure.'' Stoney, a film editor, is still living a hand-to-mouth existence, hoping for the big time, desperate to break out of the junk with which he is constantly saddled. ''Low Angles'' is a crime novel, but crime takes second place to Mr. Stinson's fascination with the cinematic mind. Stoney is hired by a shady producer to supervise a schlock, Hell's Angels kind of motorcycle film being directed by a woman. It turns out that she is unknown but really very good. Somebody is out to sabotage the film, and matters approach a complete breakdown until Stoney moves in. We learn a great deal about low-budget film making and financial finagling. And we learn just as much about the artistic aspirations even of those who know they are working on trash. It may be trash, but one does the best one can. Perhaps things can be improved. Perhaps a new approach to the camera work can redeem the film. Perhaps the bored and underpaid crew can be made to feel stimulated. Mr. Stinson, a fine writer, makes these situations very real. Douglas Kiker, the well-known NBC News correspondent, has written two novels. Now he turns his hand to mystery fiction with MURDER ON CLAM POND (Random House, $15.95), another book about a newspaperman, and a nice piece of work it is. The action takes place on Cape Cod, where a drifter named McFarland - former marine, newly divorced, unemployed reporter who was a Pulitzer winner - lives in a miserable shack and feels sorry for himself. His neighbor, an old woman, is murdered. She was very rich and had been the moving force in the town. The local police chief takes charge. He is a giant of a man with a fondness for speaking Latin: ''Te posterius videbo, alligator.'' See you later, alligator. The Boston Globe asks McFarland to do the story. He is thrilled, says yes, and then goes crazy trying to find a lead - an arresting first paragraph. Mr. Kiker amusingly and accurately describes writer's block. He also knows small-town characters and writes in a graceful, fast-moving style. Jimmy Sangster's SNOWBALL (Holt, $15.95) introduces James Reed, a California beach bum who pretends to be a writer. British-born, a retired Scotland Yard cop, he was once married to a Hollywood superstar. His former wife calls for help. Her daughter (by a marriage previous to theirs) is in trouble and needs him. It has something to do with drugs. She is indeed in trouble, and Reed has to deal with the drug scene in a film studio, the tycoon who owns the studio, killers and an attractive woman who lends him a hand. This is a very nice job - smooth, sharp, believable, well written.
