944|1987\01\04|IS THIS CRIME INEVITABLE?| RAPE  Edited by Sylvana Tomaselli and Roy Porter.  Illustrated. 292 pp. New York:  Basil Blackwell. $24.95.| RAPE  Edited by Sylvana Tomaselli and Roy Porter.  Illustrated. 292 pp. New York:  Basil Blackwell. $24.95. RAPE  Edited by Sylvana Tomaselli and Roy Porter.  Illustrated. 292 pp. New York:  Basil Blackwell. $24.95. LAST year I read a news story on ''ways to deter rape'' based on a psychological study of 800 convicted rapists. The authors of the study advised women to engage the rapist in friendly conversation and to decide according to his responses whether to categorize him as exploitative, compensatory, angry, or sadistic. They suggested different strategies in each case. If the rapist, for example, ''responds to talk by increasing his aggression and seems to want to humiliate and demean his victim,'' he is angry and should be handled empathetically: ''Try to demonstrate your sense of interest, concern or caring.'' I won't even repeat their recommendations about the sadist. This macabre scenario might work as feminist satire, but it is terrifying to imagine one's life depending on it. In many courts, moreover, these feminine expressions of empathy might be taken as evidence of sexual consent. Such impossible ''advice'' both reinforces women's feelings of powerlessness and places the responsibility for deterring rape on the victims. Even in the wake of legal reforms sparked by feminist analyses like Susan Brownmiller's influential ''Against Our Will,'' women carry the burden of two ''rape laws'': the legal system and the fear-generated system of internalized rules, boundaries and curfews that governs everyday life. Can we imagine a world without rape and the fear of it, or is rape a permanent and inevitable aspect of human society? In a step toward the comprehensive history of rape they hope might provide answers to these questions, Sylvana Tomaselli, an intellectual historian at Newnham College, Cambridge University, and Roy Porter, a historian of medicine at the Wellcome Institute in London, have invited a number of American and British scholars to discuss rape from the perspective of their own fields. The result of this laudable enterprise is an informative, if sometimes frustrating mix of ideas from law, psychoanalysis, anthropology, classics, art history, philosophy, sociobiology and popular culture. One problem is that not all of these disciplines have an equal stake in the issue of rape, or an equal value in assessing it. In a discussion of the perspectives from psychoanalysis, John Forrester, who has written widely on the history and philosophy of psychoanalysis, is commendably frank about the incompatibility of psychoanalytic and legal discourse. Within the Freudian universe, he notes, ''there is no zero state of desire,'' and the analyst must bracket ''social conflict, conflict between individuals, to highlight the conflict within individuals.'' But, Mr. Forrester insists, morally neutral psychoanalytic theories that deal with memory or unconscious process, rather than actual experience, must not be brought into the courtroom or allowed to affect legal decisions. Similarly, sophisticated analyses of the literary or visual representation of rape have to be distinguished from its social reality. In a brilliant essay on Greek myths about rape, the classicist Froma Zeitlin shows how their apparent endorsement of ''phallic power and female victimage'' conceals a more ambiguous narrative of male sexual anxiety. In another dazzling contribution, the art historian Norman Bryson demonstrates that the iconology of rape in neo-classical painting involves a set of conflicting interpretations of female sexuality and consent. But it is never clear how such subtle motives and motifs in art can illuminate the stories we read in the headlines. Even Christopher Frayling, a historian of popular culture, concedes in his lively discussion of Jack the Ripper as the cultural stereotype of the rapist that the Ripper was actually not a raper. The most useful and constructive essay is Jennifer Temkin's discussion of rape and legal reform. A lecturer in law at the London School of Economics, Ms. Temkin argues that changes in the criminal justice system that protect the victims and lead to higher rates of conviction are the most significant steps that can be taken toward controlling rape; and she describes the ways that feminist lobbying groups in several countries have campaigned effectively for legislative reform. In England, where there has been virtually no legal reform, judicial utterances on rape put the woman on trial. In 1982, for example, a judge at the Cambridge Crown Court gave the following summary to the jury: ''Women who say no do not always mean no. It is not just a question of saying no, it is a question of how she says it, how she shows and makes it clear. If she doesn't want it she only has to keep her legs shut and she would not get it without force and there would be marks of force being used.'' Ms. Temkin recommends broadening and differentiating legal definitions of rape; shifting emphasis away from the question of the woman's consent to the degree of coercion, physical injury and incapacitation of the victim; and limiting testimony about the plaintiff's sexual history. Several essays argue that rape is a cultural variable. The anthropologist Peggy Reeves Sanday describes the differences between rape-prone societies like our own, and virtually rape-free societies like West Sumatra. The incidence of rape, she finds, is lowest where principles of nurturance and nonaggression associated with matrilineage govern interpersonal behavior, and highest where masculine identity is directed by ''an ideology of toughness'' and a need to exert dominance. Ms. Sanday views rape as a form of ''concealing male vulnerability and maternal dependency,'' a man's defense against his own despised ''feminine'' dependencies by degrading and punishing the female body. In a brisk revisionist look at rape in the past, Roy Porter too makes excellent use of 18th- and 19th-century trial records to show that meanings of sexual violence must be understood in the specific historical contexts of ''economic, political, domestic and ideological arrangements.'' From the perspective of sociobiology, however, rape is a timeless and universal human behavior rather than a culturally or historically differentiated one. In the most controversial essay, Randy Thornhill, Nancy Wilmsen Thornhill and Gerard Dizinno offer an evolutionary theory of rape as the reproductive strategy of sexual losers, or, as they pithily put it, ''an evolved facultative behavior . . . engaged in by men who are relatively unsuccessful in competition for the resources and status necessary to attract and reproduce successfully with desirable mates.'' They reach this conclusion by analogy with the mating behavior of the genus Panorpa, or scorpion fly. Male Panorpa entice female Panorpa with a nuptial food offering, preferably a dead arthropod, although salivary secretions will do. Those small males who can't produce these desirable gifts attempt forced copulation instead, seizing the female's wing with their dorsal clamp and attacking her with their genital claspers. Although female Panorpa flee from males without a nuptial offering (escaping about 85 percent of the time) and resist forcible copulation - and lay few eggs when they are raped - such coercive mating is ''in no way an abnormal or 'aberrant' behavior'' for male scorpion flies. THE authors point out that human males too compete for the resources that will promote access to fertile females, and they maintain that ''it is those human males who have the greatest difficulty in climbing the social ladder who are most likely to rape.'' The clincher of their argument is that rapists prefer ''young females of high reproductive capacity'' as their victims. Flatly rejecting feminist or sociological theories about rape as products of ''ideological fervor,'' the authors deal with all the instances contradicting their own sweeping claim, such as the use of extreme violence, the ''adjustment difficulty'' of the victim, or attacks on children and the elderly, by consigning them to the realm of ''accident or psychotic mentality.'' One can only hope that such feeble logic does not pass muster even in the sociobiological community, but it is disappointing that other contributors to the volume do not take issue with the essay, or challenge the ''non-ideological'' pretensions of this kind of scientific discourse on sexual violence. A more vigorous internal debate would have made the book more valuable; instead, the essayists stay safely within their own disciplinary boundaries. For the contemporary woman who can neither expect the United States to become a nurturing matrilineal culture, move to West Sumatra, or turn herself into a tree, what prospects can these essays suggest for a future without rape? Clearly, the quarrel over women's consent ought not to be the basis of a legal definition of rape, nor of its mythology and representation. Our best hope must be the continued effort of women and men to reform the law and thereby the culture. Meanwhile, this provocative collection will keep the conversation going.  More Gatherers Than Hunters The popular view that man (i.e. the male) is basically an animal who evolved by virtue of his dominance over others rationalizes the pornographic mentality. The picture of early human social life that emerges from the work of anthropologist Nancy Tanner paints a quite different picture. She argues that male tenderness and female bonding led to the evolution of Homo sapiens. It was not hunting that brought about early human society but gathering plant food. Mothers who gathered plant food in groups with other women and who learned to walk upright and carry implements were those most likely to have children who survived to contribute to the gene pool. Natural selection favoured those with the intelligence to gather and the sociability to share with offspring. The men who belonged to these groups were those who, like women, were intelligent and sociable, adept with their hands and able to cooperate. The scenario of the violent male who roamed around beating and raping women is extremely unlikely given the need for cooperation in the gathering of plant food, which probably comprised the majority of the diet. Tanner's analysis suggests that it was male tenderness along with female sociability that produced human beings. We can conclude that while male violence will almost certainly end the world, it was heterosexual cooperation that began the long path to humanity. From ''Rape'' (Peggy Reeves Sanday).
