945|1987\01\04|JENNIFER, THE INNER BUNNY|FOOTWORK  By Ian McMahan.  373 pp. New York:  Franklin Watts. $18.95.|FOOTWORK  By Ian McMahan.  373 pp. New York:  Franklin Watts. $18.95. FOOTWORK  By Ian McMahan.  373 pp. New York:  Franklin Watts. $18.95. JENNIFER HELSON, heroine of Ian McMahan's ''Footwork,'' is 31 years old, heads her own investment firm in New York and, for at least the first third of the novel, is a strong contender for first feminist saint. The astuteness of her logic, her nimbleness with balance sheets and trajectories regularly leave the men around her in the dust. She makes a point never to have more than one drink at lunch, and though she has a ''gleaming cap of blond hair,'' ''limpid blue eyes'' and is tall, very tall - the Athena of the tax shelter game - she never uses her femininity to advance her career. ''To her mind, that was the most disastrous and tempting mistake a woman in business could make. . . . Over time, she would find that she had moved from the category of colleague to the category of bunny or kitten. And however much they might like to pet them, people did not take bunnies and kittens seriously.'' The seriousness with which Jennifer takes herself more than suffices. It's necessary if she is to survive the slippery gray menace of the old-boy network, and to triumph, which she does about every 10 pages. Jennifer is also gifted with an exquisite nose for any whiff of financial, or moral, irregularity. Invited to join the board of the Metropolitan Ballet, she senses at her first meeting that there is something not up to snuff in the debate - or lack of debate - over the choice of a new director. She also cleverly intuits that her secret adversary is millionaire smoothie Douglas Diamond, ''the most important figure in Manhattan commercial real estate'' and owner of Diamond Place, which ''offered the most exclusive shops and the most expensive condominium apartments in the city, and possibly the world.'' The rub is that Jennifer most likely buys her Jean Muir ensembles there, even though she and her highly evolved social conscience abhor the fact that ''her business required her to display the accepted signs of wealth and success.'' This conviction, however, does not keep Jennifer from a scary omniscience when it comes to New York's hip artists, wines, cheeses and mineral waters. Unfortunately, you sense that in Mr. McMahan's mind, there is little difference between this list and his catalogue of her feminist virtues. They are just one more strain of his compulsive name-dropping, in the same category as the braised radicchio salad Jennifer ate for lunch, and with the same weight in her life. Once inside her apartment, Jennifer regresses to vulnerable, lovesick woman. The case for her emotional schizophrenia is about as convincing as the case for her feminism, and just as fatuous. Mr. McMahan simply trots out a battery of trendy theories about the beleaguered soul of the Manhattan career woman: if she is successful in business, her private life is a mess; she has turned libber because she was rejected in love; she needs a good man to set her straight. Mr. McMahan even puts her through a punishing 80's version of ''The Perils of Pauline,'' featuring a lover who leaves her for another man - his parting gift, a possible case of AIDS. In this instance, Mr. McMahan's obsession to be au courant slips into cruel manipulation. IN the end, Jennifer is a bunny (or kitten) in feminist clothing. Outwitting the surveys that would have her a 35-year-old spinster, she finds the man that every adolescent girl longs for, a mysterious, gauntly handsome count-in-exile, older and taller than she, and given to black leather trenchcoats. He is also a renowned ballet dancer who, after Jennifer's long, silent vigil of hope, turns out to be a closet heterosexual. Miracles can be wrought, it seems, even in New York, if you are a very, very good and clever girl, always tell the truth, and commit to memory the best 10 spots in the city to find a decent Beaujolais nouveau.
