946|1987\01\04|TALES OF THE GRAND TEUTONS: KARL MAY AMONG THE INDIANS|ON the fourth day after my arrival in this country some 40 years ago, I stood, a New York high school freshman, before a bank of lockers labeled ''J. Edgar Hoover,'' ''Babe Ruth,'' ''Charles Lindbergh.'' On my index card I'd just written ''Fritz Mandelbaum.''|ON the fourth day after my arrival in this country some 40 years ago, I stood, a New York high school freshman, before a bank of lockers labeled ''J. Edgar Hoover,'' ''Babe Ruth,'' ''Charles Lindbergh.'' On my index card I'd just written ''Fritz Mandelbaum.'' ON the fourth day after my arrival in this country some 40 years ago, I stood, a New York high school freshman, before a bank of lockers labeled ''J. Edgar Hoover,'' ''Babe Ruth,'' ''Charles Lindbergh.'' On my index card I'd just written ''Fritz Mandelbaum.'' ''Uh - listen, Fritz,'' said Mr. Saperstein, who was to be so helpful in other aspects of my American novitiate. ''Maybe you want to do like the other guys. Don't use your own name, but somebody famous, for fun.'' Ears burning at my ignorance of these Yankee celebrities, I wrote ''Old Shatterhand'' on the other side of the card. ''Where'd you get that name from?'' Mr. Saperstein asked. ''But - it is from Karl May!'' I said. ''Who?'' I still remember how amazed I was and how rather comforting the amazement. My dummkopf incomprehension of Babe Ruth had been neutralized by Mr. Saperstein's - a teacher's! - ignorance of Karl May. To me the luster of that name was axiomatic. After all, the legendary in Karl May's books saturated (and still saturates) just about every Central European boyhood. May is a paragon of what the Germans call Trivialliteratur, or genre fiction. The fantasies of a yarn-spinner who was less than profound but more than facile have been mesmerizing German-speaking readers for just about a century now. It was 100 years ago, in the mid-1880's, that the first of a series of books appeared to whose robust appeal not even the most rarefied intellects were immune. ''My whole adolescence stood under his sign,'' said Albert Einstein. ''Much in his work was imperishable,'' said Albert Schweitzer. ''He represents,'' said Hermann Hesse, ''the most brilliant example of an elemental form of literature, namely the literature of wish-fulfillment.'' By fulfilling a wish no one else had gratified so thrillingly before him, Karl May refashioned the self-image of a nation. Wherever German is read his 73 novels have remained continuously in print, so unflagging is the demand for an author who died 75 years ago. Seven of his books have been translated in the United States in the last decade; and last summer saw the American premiere of the director Hans-Jurgen Syberberg's film ''Karl May'' (1974), part of a trilogy that includes ''Ludwig, Requiem for a Virgin King'' and ''Our Hitler.'' To explain the writer's impact, I should start with his life. Perhaps only Karl May, that virtuoso of flamboyant improbability, could have invented such a career. Imagine a boy born in 1842, the fifth child of 14 in a poor weaver's family. Imagine him going blind with malnourishment and staying blind until he was 5. Imagine frail little Karl squinting himself into literacy in grade school and, thanks to his intelligence, into a teacher's training school in his teens. Imagine him, on the brink of respectability as a substitute teacher, arrested for theft - the first of a series of sleazy offenses that saw him in and out of prison for the next decade and a half. And then imagine the paradoxes of his mind-boggling ascent. May, whose background was so wretchedly unheroic, begins to write about a knight-errant of nonpareil ethics and muscle. Known as Old Shatterhand in Indian territory, he battles desperadoes. As Kara ben Nemsi, he takes on fiendish emirs in the dunes and casbahs of Arabia. May's experience at that point was entirely and provincially Middle European. He had never been west of the Rhine or south of the Alps. Yet he wrapped his hero's bravery in persuasively textured exotica - the weighty spoor of the grizzly bear, the idiosyncrasies of the camel, the rhythm of the muezzin's call, the tempering of a tomahawk blade. May had every reason to separate his actual life from his stories. Yet he did exactly the opposite. Billing his novels ''Reiseerzahlungen'' or ''travel tales,'' he implied they were autobiography rather than fiction. His protagonist likes the dialect of May's native Saxony. And the name ''Kara ben Nemsi'' points directly at the author - it means Karl, son of the Germans. As a result, May's fame rose in direct proportion to his characters'. That rise was stupendous. At first his work was serialized in monthlies aimed at juveniles and he instantly eclipsed long-established contributors. The moment his ''Reiseerzahlungen'' were published as books, buyers of all ages con-verged on the stores for the newest May. He outsold, and still outsells, the competition by a staggering margin in German-speaking lands. Other adventure novelists - no matter how great their resonance elsewhere - have never been able to match his mystique. When Rudyard Kipling, Robert Louis Stevenson and Jack London were translated into German in the 1890's, their publishers packaged them in a format imitating May's. The last decade of his life (he died in 1912) knew controversy and defamation, that final dimension of renown. Headlines screeched his early life as a criminal; he became mired in libel litigation that embittered him while it increased his sales. After his death his popularity swelled still further. Each new crop of German youth read more Karl May than the preceding. A publishing house - the Karl May Verlag - was founded just to print his novels, the Karl May Yearbooks and the proceedings of the Karl May Society as well as endless biographies, appreciations and interpretations of the man. The cult flourished through the two world wars, indeed spread. The actor Lex Barker left a middling Hollywood career to become something of a superstar in Central Europe as Kara ben Nemsi and Old Shatterhand. And recently East Germany caved in to the inevitable: for 30 years it had banned the ''chauvinist'' Karl May, but now Germans East as well as Germans West can wolf down their doses of Shatterhand and Nemsi; each Germany has its own Karl May Museum. To sell the 100 million copies May has so far, a writer must command more than one virtue - and probably more than one fault. May's flaws are abundant. Nuance does not interest him. His leading players are either seamlessly noble or irremediably vile; his supporting actors are well-carpentered stereotypes - the eccentric English lord or the big-mouthed sidekick. His style, though never clumsy, is artless, straightforward, the plain handmaiden to his plots. But, ah, his plots! What an ingenious, intricate web of main and sub! Within the reassuring framework of the Happy End, what a mosaic of entrapment and getaway, cunning and countermove, evil enigma and inspired solution! How unerringly paced the narrative! The angle of suspense is ever shifting. A minute away from death by poisoned arrow, Old Shatterhand manages to cut the cords that bind him. But who slipped him the knife? A new mystery begins, another tantalizing turn. And May's encyclopedic way with local color not only fleshes out the action but ministers to the German hunger for fact; with each denouement one learns how the Bedouin roasts his lamb or how the Comanche grooms his horse. Still, the magic of Karl May transcends expertly orchestrated derring-do. It issues as well from the nature of his protagonist. Old Shatterhand is not Wyatt Earp. Earp, like many of his counterparts in American westerns, is a lawman with a touch of the outlaw. He comes to town to clean out the rotters, but is himself on the lam from another town - if not from its sheriff, from its unjust suspicions. He is an outsider: disillusionment feeds his alertness, powers his trigger finger, solicits our sympathy. Old Shatterhand's outsiderdom, by contrast, seems purely superficial. He is a greenhorn and overcomes that stigma with his fists and his marksmanship. He knows no interior corrosion; villainy constantly confronts him, but his motives for traveling are those of a keen-minded, equable naturalist, interested in flora and fauna. Exploits finished, he'll return to his Saxon coziness. BUT - and it's a fascinating but - the prowess of the Karl May hero proved magnetic only in combat with non-German foreigners outside Germany. May novels with a Middle European background have never sold nearly as well as those set in some pungently remote milieu, far from the middle-class blandness of policemen and accountants, the solid kinder-kirche-kuche reality of May's homeland. Readers wanted from him what he was the first to give them in truly popular form: an epos of the German conquistador bestriding the world at large. It's odd, but the country that was to generate so formidable a nationalism in the 20th century had, until the 19th, few heroic figures to call its own. Britain's ran from King Arthur to Lord Nelson; France had a gallery from Roland to Louis XIV. But Germany? The scattered sagas of the Germanic tribes dramatize the end of Rome rather than the dawn of Teutonia. There is, of course, the story of Frederick Barbarossa, the Hohenstaufen emperor whose red beard grows through a stone table while he sleeps in a cave under Kyffhauser Mountain - until the day he wakes, and with him, German greatness. But it's an inert bit of folklore and purloined at that (originally it applied to Barbarossa's grandson Frederick II, who, half-Sicilian, reigned in Italy and was quite Mediterranean in temper and orientation). By contrast, Frederick the Great, who fashioned Prussia into a redoubtable fighting machine, was a Frenchi-Continued on next page fied epicene who adored Voltaire, called his palace Sans Souci and played the flute on high heels - hardly an icon of German manliness. By the 19th century Germans knew themselves to be respectable, reliable, thorough, knowledgeable and not particularly heroic. At this juncture Richard Wagner and Karl May, born a year apart, went to work. Pulling the Nibelungs out of medieval mists, Wagner charged them with Teutonic grandeur. But it was May who made patriotism mythic for the man in the street. For every German who can hum a Siegfried aria, 10 will recite Old Shatterhand's sallies. True, there is much more to Wagner's vision than Herrenvolk propaganda, and in his final books May preached a mystical pacifism. Yet both men, on different esthetic levels, helped shape the collective German dream of feats far beyond middle-class bounds - a dream Hitler mobilized into mania. One of the Fuhrer's principal biographers, Joachim Fest, records that the young Hitler liked to dress up as a Karl May character and that later, during his first year as Chancellor, he reread all of May's novels. A tradition that Hitler advised his generals in Russia to carry May as a tacticians' handbook has not been substantiated, but on June 26, 1944, a Berlin newspaper did report that large numbers of German soldiers were grateful to Karl May for providing them with ''the best manuals of anti-partisan warfare.'' How peculiar, then, my instinct on reaching America: that I, a Jewish refugee from German conquest, should write ''Old Shatterhand,'' a name prototypical of the conquering German, on my high school locker. How ironic that today I still catch myself sneaking to the corner in my library where my five volumes of Karl May are tucked away, where sachems and sheiks ride in gothic typeface down yellowing pages. There's more than irony to that, more than nostalgia. When I packed my suitcase in Vienna in 1939, I put in my Karl Mays along with my soccer ball and my leather shorts as keepsakes of a home to which there would be no return. But the books were not just mementos. They were also charms. I hoped my trip into strangeness, like Old Shatterhand's, would turn into high romance. Never mind that the people I was fleeing were Old Shatterhand's own, whose valor he glorified. The issue of the moment was survival: for me, Karl May was talismanic because of his hero's triumphant escapes. Even today, seasoned, cynical escapee that I am, I like to open a May novel and watch Old Shatterhand fake a trail that will foil the murderous prospector. I'm in the hands of a master of the genre. He won't enrich me with insights, but he'll bless me with a few therapeutic thrills. For a few young minutes I'll believe once more that life is not tragedy but adventure.
