947|1987\01\04|New & Noteworthy|THE TRIUMPH OF POLITICS: The Inside Story of the Reagan Revolution, by David A. Stockman. (Avon, $4.95.) The former budget director's inside account of how economic policy is made is a ''devastating portrait of high-comedy incompetence and low deceit in the Reagan White House'' as well as ''a valuable document of the American political condition,'' Michael Kinsley said in The Book Review last year.|THE TRIUMPH OF POLITICS: The Inside Story of the Reagan Revolution, by David A. Stockman. (Avon, $4.95.) The former budget director's inside account of how economic policy is made is a ''devastating portrait of high-comedy incompetence and low deceit in the Reagan White House'' as well as ''a valuable document of the American political condition,'' Michael Kinsley said in The Book Review last year. THE TRIUMPH OF POLITICS: The Inside Story of the Reagan Revolution, by David A. Stockman. (Avon, $4.95.) The former budget director's inside account of how economic policy is made is a ''devastating portrait of high-comedy incompetence and low deceit in the Reagan White House'' as well as ''a valuable document of the American political condition,'' Michael Kinsley said in The Book Review last year. THE GOOD APPRENTICE, by Iris Murdoch. (Penguin, $7.95.) Iris Murdoch's novel is the story of two stepbrothers - Edward, a university student who must cope with his guilt and grief after causing a friend's death, and Stuart, who renounces a brilliant career to devote himself to good works. The author has ''authentic spiritual originality,'' Harold Bloom said here last year. ''Miss Murdoch's particular mastery is in representing the maelstrom of falling in love. . . . No other contemporary British novelist seems to me of her eminence. . . . She has earned now the tribute she made to Sartre more than 30 years ago. She too has the style of the age.'' THE FIFTY-MINUTE HOUR: A Collection of True Psychoanalytic Tales, by Robert Lindner. (Delta Diamond, $6.95.) Robert Lindner's portrait of psychoanalysis takes the form of five case studies - including those of a bulimic woman, a rapist-murderer and a schizophrenic scientist. The author ''is a psychoanalyst as well as a fine storyteller,'' our reviewer, Jean Evans, said in 1954. ''In this book the reader learns something about the doctor as well as about his patients, and about the interplay that is psychoanalysis.'' ODESSA BEACH, by Bob Leuci. (Signet/New American Library, $3.95.) One step ahead of the K.G.B., a Russian black marketeer arrives in Brooklyn and muscles in on the mob. This is a Mafia thriller with ''an unusual twist,'' Newgate Callendar said here last year. ''Mr. Leuci is a very good technician who would appear to know a good deal about organized crime in New York. . . . Everything rings true.'' IMMODEST ACTS: The Life of a Lesbian Nun in Renaissance Italy, by Judith C. Brown. (Oxford University, $6.95.) Benedetta Carlini, a 17th-century nun and mystic, became a powerful abbess but fell into disgrace when she was accused of faking miracles and having a lesbian affair. Her story, based on papers discovered in Florentine archives, is ''fascinating and highly readable,'' Frederika Randall said here a year ago. SELECTED SHORT STORIES OF PADRAIC COLUM, edited by Sanford Sternlicht. (Syracuse University, $12.95.) These 13 early stories by Padraic Colum ''are in the main vignettes, chapters in the lives of the Irish peasantry at the turn of the century,'' Thomas Lask said in The Book Review in 1985. ''The writing is informal, uncluttered, colloquial with those precise images and turns of phrase that could have easily been shaped into formal verse.'' TENDER OFFER: The Sneak Attack in Corporate Takeovers, by Dorman L. Commons. (Penguin, $6.95.) The former chief executive officer of the Natomas Company offers a personal account of its unfriendly takeover by the Diamond Shamrock Corporation. This is ''the most human document to come out of the high-stakes takeover wars,'' Hal Goodman said in these pages in 1985. WHITE WATER, by Joyce Reiser Kornblatt. (Laurel/ Dell, $3.95.) This novel about a family brought together in Miami for a wedding moves with ''energy and narrative conviction,'' Kathryn Morton said in The Book Review in 1985. ''First novels often have problems of shape. But some, like 'White Water,' by the most promising authors, lift the reader over the rough structure on the strength of their wit and insight, the rich sound of voices and the energetic flow of invention.'' THREE CENTURIES OF HARVARD: 1636-1936, by Samuel Eliot Morison. (Belknap/Harvard University, Paper, $9.95. Cloth, $25.) This history of Harvard uses ''precise and luminous strokes'' to tell a story ''rich in details as to the customs and manners of three centuries,'' John Corbin said here in 1936. McKAY'S BEES, by Thomas McMahon. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $5.95.) Set in 1855, Thomas McMahon's novel is populated by scientists and tinkerers, chiefly Gordon McKay, who sets out for Kansas to build a city based on beekeeping. Not one of the characters is a stereotypical scientist, our reviewer, Edmund White, said in 1979. ''Science itself informs the descriptions that run through the novel, and in this regard Mr. McMahon,'' himself a scientist, ''is at his most original.'' THE EVIDENCE NEVER LIES: The Casebook of a Modern Sherlock Holmes, by Alfred Allan Lewis with Herbert Leon MacDonell. (Laurel/Dell, $7.95.) An authority on bloodstains, ballistics and fingerprints, Herbert Leon MacDonell has served as an expert witness in scores of murder cases, seven of which are recounted here. ''All are intriguing,'' one reviewer said in 1984, ''and one only wishes there were more.'' NOBODY'S ANGEL, by Thomas McGuane. (Vintage, $6.95.) The hero of Thomas McGuane's sixth novel, Patrick Fitzpatrick, is a 36-year-old former military officer who comes home to his family's Montana ranch. ''The play of wit is constant and redeeming,'' Vance Bourjaily said in these pages in 1982. NO SENSE OF PLACE: The Impact of Electronic Media on Social Behavior, by Joshua Meyrowitz. (Oxford University, $9.95.) The author examines how electronic media - particularly television - have altered Americans' sense of place and the ways we give and receive social information. In 1985 one reviewer called it a well-written and masterly study, ''a fine combination of perceptive analysis and creative synthesis.''
