949|1987\01\04|NOTED WITH PLEASURE|Telling a Story With Sticks What does a jazz drummer think about when he plays? In ''American Musicians: 56 Portraits in Jazz'' (Oxford University), Whitney Balliett quotes the legendary Buddy Rich.|Telling a Story With Sticks What does a jazz drummer think about when he plays? In ''American Musicians: 56 Portraits in Jazz'' (Oxford University), Whitney Balliett quotes the legendary Buddy Rich. Telling a Story With Sticks What does a jazz drummer think about when he plays? In ''American Musicians: 56 Portraits in Jazz'' (Oxford University), Whitney Balliett quotes the legendary Buddy Rich. Playing a drum solo is like telling a story. It has a beginning, a middle, and . . . a punch line. I try and play a drum solo constructed along a line. What comes out is what I feel. I'm telling you about my wife, my daughter, what nice people I was with before I got on the stand. When Johnny Carson comes in I try and play in that light, funny way he has. When Basie comes in, I play with love. Some nights people tell me I've played vicious, and they're right. Maybe I've been thinking about thirty years of one-nighters or maybe about what a drag it was in the Marines. But the next night I'll come to where I'm playing and say, ''Sorry, little drums, I'll be tender tonight.'' Drums can be as musical as Heifetz. You don't pick up sticks as if they were hammers. It's a matter of using your hands to apply pressure. You apply the power, the beauty. Marilyn, Sartre and Anna Freud Marilyn Monroe attracted irony as well as men. This is from ''Marilyn'' (Holt), by Gloria Steinem, with photographs by George Barris. As an actress, she often objected to playing a ''dumb blonde,'' which she feared would also be her fate in real life, but she might have attempted the ''serious actress'' appeal of playing Cecily, a patient of Sigmund Freud. After all, the director of this movie was John Huston and the screenwriter was Jean-Paul Sartre, who considered Marilyn ''one of the greatest actresses alive.'' Ironically, Dr. Ralph Greenson, a well-known Freudian who was Marilyn's analyst in the last months of her life, advised against it, because, he said, Freud's daughter did not approve of the film. Otherwise, Marilyn would have been called upon to enact the psychotic fate she feared most in real life, and to play the patient of a man whose belief in female passivity may have been part of the reason she was helped so little by psychiatry. Please Don't Iron the Poetry Brave in poetry, Wallace Stevens was timid with women. Writing to his fiancee about his forthcoming visit, he flirts with the idea of being indecorous. This is from ''Wallace Stevens: the Early Years, 1879-1923'' (Beech Tree/Morrow), by Joan Richardson. I think it would be nice if we could just spend our time together quietly without attempting or wishing to do much - so that the time itself would seem longer. But that is always so difficult - I want to steep myself in you, if I may use so extraordinary a term - as if you were a South Wind and as if I were - well, a dingy fellow, as I am. You will not be too terribly ironed, will you? Just have a few comfortable things - perhaps pink slippers quite late, and that plate of cakes so that I won't feel at all as if I were making a call. Suppose we could pass quickly through some gates of the imagination and find ourselves? Yes - we must do that at once. - You must not look at me as if you had not seen me for a long time or anything. (A mandoline passes in the street.) Yet it is silly to lay down so many rules. They'll all be broken. There seem to be reservoirs concealed in all of us - even the most sedate - that break unexpectedly. To Be Beau The Academie Francaise is a sort of permanent jury in a perpetual trial of French culture. In ''Mission to Civilize'' (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), Mort Rosenblum quotes Jean d'Ormesson, a member of the Academy, on its purpose. ''What purpose the Academy?'' is one of those recurrent questions posed by imbeciles when they exhaust the charms of the weather. . . . What purpose? Mais, none, like all delicious and somewhat great things. What purposes cats, the Temple of Abu Simbel, the islands of the Italian lakes, the flame roses of the Camargue, military parades and the strutting of animals who wish to dazzle their conquests, the very old oaks of our fields, our memories of happiness? What purpose rites and ceremonies? To the eyes of a world dominated by money, by power in all of its aspects, by collective movements, fleeting and blind, what purpose the Academy? None. None at all. Its purpose is to be beau. Packed With Meaning Like a Van Poets are the perfect travelers, for even if the place is disappointing that too suits their purpose. Here W. H. Auden turns his bloodshot cosmopolitan eye on Brussels. The poem is in ''The Oxford Book of Travel Verse'' (Oxford University), edited by Kevin Crossley-Holland.  Wandering through cold streets tangled like old  string,  Coming on fountains rigid in the frost,  Its formula escapes you; it has lost  The certainty that constitutes a thing.  Only the old, the hungry and the humbled  Keep at this temperature a sense of place,  And in their misery are all assembled;  The winter holds them like an Opera-House.  Ridges of rich apartments loom to-night  Where isolated windows glow like farms,  A phrase goes packed with meaning like a van,  A look contains the history of man,  And fifty francs will earn a stranger right  To take the shuddering city in his arms.
