95|1987\01\01|REPORT ANALYZES INCREASED COSTS OF TELEPHONE BILLS|THE average consumer's telephone bill has risen by nearly 20 percent in the three years since the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, according to a report made public by the Consumer Federation of America.|THE average consumer's telephone bill has risen by nearly 20 percent in the three years since the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, according to a report made public by the Consumer Federation of America. THE average consumer's telephone bill has risen by nearly 20 percent in the three years since the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, according to a report made public by the Consumer Federation of America. Even after allowing for substantial reductions in long-distance telephone rates, the report says, the increased cost of local service has accounted for ''the largest sustained real increase in residential telephone bills since the passage of the Communications Act over half a century ago.'' When the American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced its plan in January 1982 to settle a Federal antitrust suit by divesting itself of local phone companies, the telephone company predicted that local rates would rise by about 8 percent to 10 percent a year and that long-distance rates would rise at a rate slightly slower than inflation. The Consumer Federation report says that local rates have risen by 40 percent, or 10 percent faster than A.T.&T. predicted, since the breakup in 1983. Consumer groups say they believe customers are beginning to feel that deregulation so far has benefited only the local telephone companies by allowing them to diversify their business and in that way increase their revenues. This year, for the first time, consumers in three states - Arizona, Oregon and Maine - were asked to vote on bills that would have further deregulated local telephone rates, but in each state they voted against further change. At a time when state utility regulators are predicting an era of lower utility rates because of dropping interest rates and the new tax code, consumer groups say it is time for those regulators to begin asking telephone companies to pass on to consumers some of the profits they have received through deregulation. The Consumer Federation report is based on an analysis of telephone costs compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Consumer Price Index. The Consumer Federation, a nonprofit organization that represents more than 200 state and local consumer groups, said in its report: ''We were told that widespread, cutthroat competition would drive down telephone prices and bring information-age gadgets and services to all consumers. Instead, consumers must pay significantly more to get the same old service they had prior to the breakup.'' The report says the Consumer Price Index shows that the amount consumers pay in local telephone costs rose by 39.8 percent from January 1984 to October 1986. Long-distance tolls on calls made within states increased by 4 percent, while long-distance rates for calls that cross state lines have dropped by 17 percent in that time. In a survey of basic monthly costs, excluding the amount of money paid for calls but including fixed fees for access to long-distance service, installation and wiring costs, local phone charges have risen to about $15.40 a month this year from $10.55 a month in 1983. Another study, the preliminary results of a survey scheduled to come out later this month, indicates that 20 percent to 25 percent of households with annual incomes of less than $15,000 do not have phones. About half of those families used to have phones, according to the report by the United States Public Interest Research Group, an association of state public interest research groups originally formed by Ralph Nader. Pamela Gilbert, the association's staff attorney, said more than half of those now without phones say they cannot afford them. The study was based on a door-to-door survey of about a thousand households in 10 states with annual incomes below $15,000. The percentage of American households with telephones grew from 78 percent in 1960 to 93 percent in 1980, but has hovered around 91 to 93 percent for the past six years. Ms. Gilbert said the cost of telephone service was decreasing in the 1960's and 1970's, but that since 1980 the true cost, including inflation, has risen. The Consumer Federation report compares the earnings of the Bell operating companies with those of other corporations in Business Week magazine's list of the top 1,000 American companies, ranked according to market value. It says that in a period when regulators granted $5.5 billion in phone rate increases, the phone companies earned more money than comparable private corporations. In 1984 the phone companies earned the same return on equity, about 13.2 percent, that others in the top 1,000 earned. In 1985, however, their average return was 13.7 percent, while the average for all the companies in the top 1,000 was 11.4 percent, and in 1986 they earned 14 percent as against the average of 10.9 percent for the top 1,000 companies. The phone companies also showed better earnings than other utility companies, the report said. If the Bell operating companies had earned rates of return similar to those of the top 1,000 companies or other utilities, the Consumer Federation said, the cost to consumers would have been $1.25 billion to $2 billion less. And if those rates of return had also reflected the benefits the phone companies received from lower interest on their capital costs and depreciation expenses, their rates would have been another $1 billion less, the report said. Thomas J. Novick, executive director of the Oregon State Public Interest Research Group, said of the recent vote in that state on further phone deregulation, ''We think in large part the vote reflected a distrust of the phone company.'' In Oregon and Maine, the voters were considering whether to allow their regional telephone companies to charge all customers for local calls as they now charge for long-distance calls, based on the number and lengths of calls, and the time of day and distance. The Oregon vote was on whether to ban the phone company from establishing such a mandatory system of local metered service. About 80 percent voted in favor of the ban. Thus the company can offer local metered service for customers who want it, but must continue to offer local service at a flat rate, as phone companies have traditionally done. In Maine, the state utilities commission had approved mandatory local metered service. After 50,000 voters signed a referendum petition, the measure was revised to require the phone company to also offer a flat rate, which consumer groups said was higher than the metered rates approved by the commission. The measure eventually put on the ballot prohibited mandatory local metered service and required a ''low-cost flat rate.'' Although the local phone company spent more than $1.6 million to defeat the proposal, it passed. ''I think these votes show that people want traditional service at low cost,'' said Craig McDonald, the field director for Public Citizen, a consumer group based in Washington. ''They don't want to be subsidizing the other new ventures of the phone company.'' Arizona voters considered a bill that would have transferred regulation of phone rates to the Legislature and would simultaneously have deregulated most of the company's new ventures - primarily data transmission. Arizona voters rejected the measure, according to Susan Williams, director of the state's Residential Utility Consumer Office, because ''the telephone customer, while perhaps puzzled by the names used, has not been fooled by the general direction, which is to sock it to the small business users or the small residential users.''
