950|1987\01\04|CHILDREN'S BOOKS| MIDNIGHT HOUR ENCORES  By Bruce Brooks.  263 pp. New York:  Harper & Row. $13.95.  (Ages 12 & up)| MIDNIGHT HOUR ENCORES  By Bruce Brooks.  263 pp. New York:  Harper & Row. $13.95.  (Ages 12 & up) MIDNIGHT HOUR ENCORES  By Bruce Brooks.  263 pp. New York:  Harper & Row. $13.95.  (Ages 12 & up) AT 16, Sibilance T. Spooner is a professional cellist. She has won three international music competitions, been a soloist under prominent conductors, performed all over Europe and recorded a few digital albums. When not on tour she lives a comfortable life in Washington with her doting father, Taxi. She has everything a girl could want - except a mother. A few months before she is scheduled to pack her bags for Juilliard, Sibilance announces she is finally ready to meet the woman who discarded her at birth. Taxi drops what he is doing and buys a 20-year-old Volkswagen bus which he equips with military surplus gear: duffel bags, tent, mattress - the works. He's in a frenzy to justify to Sibilance the ideology that permitted his wife to abandon both of them; he wants to make her understand the 60's. Sibilance is not amused. When she, who is accustomed to late-model Volvos and American Tourister suitcases, sniffs at the lumpy green duffels, Taxi suggests their usual formal black luggage wouldn't be ''appropriate'' for this particular journey. ''Appropriate? What are we going to do -invade Cuba?'' his daughter snorts. ''Midnight Hour Encores'' is a narrative in Sibilance's voice; naturally she gives herself all the good lines. She is an arrogant, accomplished child of extraordinary and narrow intelligence; she is a whiz at music, sarcasm and manipulating people, yet does poorly in school, doesn't read books, has no friends and, as it turns out, has deluded herself about her feelings for her nurturing father. Bruce Brooks keeps his heroine's scintillatingly cynical voice consistent throughout, but the tone of this monologue is bound to create difficulties for its intended audience, the MTV generation, one of the objects of his heroine's scorn. It will be difficult for a young reader to cultivate sympathy for a character so flashily contemptuous of pop culture. Most teen-agers don't know the Debussy Quartet from the Ravel; most probably don't care, either. But as Sibilance rattles along snottily, using musical jargon miles beyond the comprehension of the average young adult, she sounds tauntingly superior. This is bound to be off-putting and frequently bewildering. Early in the story, for example, she makes a casual, derogatory comment about ''Ma doing the Bach suites.'' True, that is precisely how a real child-cellist would have articulated the phrase, but most American teen-agers won't have heard of Yo-Yo Ma and will probably deduce that Sibilance is talking about her missing mother - who has been mentioned already on the dust jacket and in the story. Van Halen fans aside, there does exist a substantial pool of classically trained students who would relish a novel that reflects their rarefied milieu so unapologetically, but unfortunately ''Midnight Hour Encores'' suffers from inconsistencies sure to alienate the musical child, too. Sibilance blithely states, ''the circle of international music critics puts me about third or fourth in the world right now,'' then proceeds to specify today's most renowned cellists (to whom she considers herself superior). This is an outrageous assertion, even for the most egomaniacal of Juilliard freshmen. Sibilance claims to be a self-made woman, but musically that's impossible. If she has won so many competitions, where is her mentor? Who is her coach? She refers to her beloved first teacher, long dead - but who has helped her get to Brussels, Prague and Rome? No matter how talented, no 16-year-old blossoms into an artistically consummate world-class instrumentalist on her own. To pretend otherwise is an insult to the discipline, and those who study music know this. CONSPICUOUSLY absent from Sibilance's monologue is any consciousness of the business side of her career. Who has booked all the concerts with the major symphonies? Who has negotiated those recording contracts? In an atmosphere where teen-age virtuosos jockey for positions on prestigious rosters and agents cluster like flies around young talent it is inconceivable that Sibilance could produce such a long monologue with no references to this aspect of her life. Also problematic are the discussions about music which sound researched and tend to flatten the natural drama of the story. When Sibilance and Taxi improvise a tone poem, as an homage to the ''Age of Aquarius,'' it does not seem spontaneous. This is a lengthy, pivotal scene, but dull. In his award-winning first novel, ''The Moves Make the Man,'' Mr. Brooks used similar expository techniques with great success - but he was describing basketball, not musical passages. It might be that sports are intrinsically more exciting on paper than classical music - or, more likely, that the author is more excited by sports. In any case, ''Midnight Hour Encores'' lacks the zip of his earlier work and such listlessness obscures what would have been an engaging story about selfishness, self-exploration and self-discovery. One hopes that Mr. Brooks, who has a keen ear for the adolescent voice, will focus his next attempts on a protagonist less pretentious.
