951|1987\01\04|THE SILVER-GRAY SOUL OF ULRICH VOGTMANN| WINNER TAKES ALL  By Dieter Wellershoff.  Translated by Paul Knight.  388 pp. New York: Carcanet. $16.95.| WINNER TAKES ALL  By Dieter Wellershoff.  Translated by Paul Knight.  388 pp. New York: Carcanet. $16.95. WINNER TAKES ALL  By Dieter Wellershoff.  Translated by Paul Knight.  388 pp. New York: Carcanet. $16.95. DIETER WELLERSHOFF's hero, Ulrich Vogtmann, orphaned during World War II, attains manhood in postwar West Germany with no sense of direction and the conviction that ''I am nobody.'' The closest he comes to inspiration is a university lecture that he attends by chance and that leaves him convinced money is ''the life-stuff of the imagination. . . . the universal machine which set all other machines in motion . . . the metabolism of society.'' Through a friend he gets a job at a dairy-product factory owned and run by one Hermann Pattberg. Pattberg, who holds his position by inheritance, is unambitious and only marginally competent, and Vogtmann quickly drifts rather than drives his way to the job of managing director, having meanwhile entered a loveless marriage with the boss's daughter, Elisabeth, after breaking off an affair with an older Yugoslav woman at the very moment she has a messy abortion. Thereafter, Vogtmann's life is an unmitigated disaster in both commercial and human terms. Gambling to expand the business, he buys a supermarket chain based in Munich, only to discover that he has been taken in the transaction. He tries to recoup with a second, more desperate deal with a promoter of questionable repute - an investment of 1.4 million marks in heavily discounted bills of exchange secured by a quantity of deadly poison pills, intended as insecticide for use in Zaire. Vogtmann's marriage deteriorates; his alcoholic brother-in-law tries to kill him and then commits suicide; his son becomes a shoplifter and writes ''NO FUTURE'' in huge letters on the main building of the school he attends, and Vogtmann carries on a listless affair with a frivolous woman in Munich. When political unrest in Zaire makes the bills of exchange worthless, the Pattberg firm is ruined and the story moves to its predictable conclusion. Through this gloomy narrative, we spend a lot of time with Vogtmann in hotel rooms, on superhighways in his silver-gray Mercedes and at business and business-social meetings. Many weather fronts pass over West Germany, and the storms they bring are duly recorded. Where American novels of business are apt to glitter with ingenious technical detail but are weak on character and description, this one focuses on the true material of fiction, and properly keeps information on commercial method in the background. The reader ends with the feeling of having been with Vogtmann, perhaps even of having been Vogtmann, for a time. But the feeling is depressing. One is reminded not, as the publisher hopes, of Thomas Mann's ''Buddenbrooks,'' but rather of Zola. Mr. Wellershoff, a West German novelist, essayist and dramatist who has been rendered here in a readable translation by Paul Knight, offers effective descriptions of furniture and mood and squalor (in this case the squalor not of poverty but of affluence), as well as rather heavy-handed symbolism: Vogtmann, who literally deformed his feet by wearing too-tight shoes in his youth, has deformed his adult soul by making a god of money. But, in literary art if not in life, Zola's time has gone, and the poetry even Zola managed is missing here. Sociologically, this is surely the dark side of Germany's economic miracle: while West Germany rose with Western aid from the ashes of war to world leadership, greedy, empty men were destroying themselves and all they touched, there as elsewhere. The fact that ''Winner Takes All'' was a best seller in West Germany suggests that Vogtmann's story has a contemporary resonance in that country.
