953|1987\01\04|'ALL ABOARD FOR RATAPOILOPOLIS'| DIFFICULT DEATH  By Rene Crevel.  Translated, and with an introduction,  by David Rattray.  135 pp. San Francisco:  North Point Press. Paper, $11.95.| DIFFICULT DEATH  By Rene Crevel.  Translated, and with an introduction,  by David Rattray.  135 pp. San Francisco:  North Point Press. Paper, $11.95. DIFFICULT DEATH  By Rene Crevel.  Translated, and with an introduction,  by David Rattray.  135 pp. San Francisco:  North Point Press. Paper, $11.95. THIS volume, previously unavailable in English, appears more than 50 years after Rene Crevel's suicide, and a great deal of special pleading occurs, both in the translator's introduction and the deeply incoherent and self-regarding foreword by Salvador Dali, before the reader is allowed to make his own judgments. One has a strong suspicion that the decision to issue the novel for an English-speaking market has to do with a perceived topicality in Crevel's homosexual inclinations. Yet the overemphasis on the more sensational aspects of his life - which are indeed closely paralleled by events in ''Difficult Death'' - does the novelist in the end less than justice. What is noteworthy in this work, quite elegantly translated by David Rattray, is precisely the intellectual and stylistic clarity with which personal relationships are portrayed, a clarity that owes more to the tradition of self-examination in French literature than it does to the contemporaneous trends of Surrealism, a Hydra-like beast if ever there was one. Crevel at 26 was capable of analyzing, in meticulous detail, such diverse emotional situations as the middle-aged viciousness, over tea, between Mme. Blok (sensualist) and Mme. Dumont-Dufour (chastiser of the flesh); the mesmerized distress of the hero, Pierre, as he watches his American lover clasped in an explicit embrace by a young street boy; and, most remarkable of all, in the lucid rapidity of mood change and subtlety of psychological motivation, Pierre's attempts to communicate an essentially platonic feeling to a woman who persistently refuses to acknowledge realities. Such extreme attention to detail contradicts the conventional definition of Surrealism as primarily involved with the subconscious; on the contrary, Crevel's achievement lies in presenting the quirky, the sexually tormented, the insane, not so much as aberration or eccentricity, but as a reality no less possible than the quite clearly manic war cry of Mme. Dumont-Dufour against her certified husband - ''All aboard for Ratapoilopolis!'' What the novel does not provide is psychological development. Crevel is not interested in a strong narrative peg on which to hang his observations. Again, one is reminded of the surgical, but unmistakably adolescent, sensitivity of the early 19th-century novelist Benjamin Constant as much as the antirationalism of full-blown Surrealists. This makes Crevel a complex figure, but not necessarily a rounded one: the conclusion of ''Difficult Death'' leaves one wondering exactly why this death is difficult, and, indeed, why it is seen as a solution to the hero's very egocentric problems at all.
