956|1987\01\04|ON LANGUAGE|THE NEWS ABOUT the nomenclature of the arms scandal is that -gate is dead as a combining form.|THE NEWS ABOUT the nomenclature of the arms scandal is that -gate is dead as a combining form. THE NEWS ABOUT the nomenclature of the arms scandal is that -gate is dead as a combining form. In European newspapers, Irangate was tried, but Americans did not pick it up; doves here have tried to shift the focus to Nicaragua by calling it contragate, but hawks resisted; Northgate, after the Marine colonel in the center of the mess, was too specific and limiting. -Gate just did not fly this time, and it may turn out that the last linguistic echo of Watergate died with a whimper, in a minor flap about expense accounts a few years ago that I tried to label doublebillingsgate. What catchy moniker should be applied to the current crisis? Suggestions, mostly facetious, have ranged from Iranamuck to Gipperdammerung; it is as if a scandal without an agreed-upon label lacks the identity that turns a story into history. However, the grand tradition of Credit Mobilier, Teapot Dome and Watergate, and corruption's lesser symbolic tradition of Deepfreezes and vicuna coats, has been interrupted this time. Perhaps because there are too many suggested names, or because the scandal has not found a locus (Arms-for-hostages? Secret dealings wrongly withheld from Congress? Diversion of funds?), the business of naming the scandal is in more disarray than the Reagan Administration, which is saying plenty. Worse, grisly grammarians in the media are having trouble getting universal acceptance for a noun to describe the current state of affairs. The New York Times has a series of pages devoted daily to what it calls the White House crisis, a neutral term; some political observers with memories of Truman days prefer the most descriptive but less objective mess. Nobody turned to caper, the original brushoff of the Watergate break-in, because that word is too lighthearted. Blunder stumbled on the scene, had a brief moment at the start, but was soon replaced by the more resounding fiasco. That ringing term may come from the Late Latin flasco, meaning ''bottle,'' which was associated in slang with the actions taken in drunkenness, and came to mean ''a grandiose plan that flops.'' Fiasco became the only acceptable vogue term for the aborted invasion at the Bay of Pigs, but the noun was soon replaced; the switch to scandal took place when the story of ransom payments was given a new dimension by the disclosure of the diversion of arms profits to the contras. Friends of the President are still clinging to imbroglio, an Italian word meaning ''confused, noisy embroilment,'' from the Old French brouiller, ''to broil,'' which meant ''to be in disorder.'' It long meant a confused heap: ''I keep my prints an imbroglio,/ Fifty in one portfolio,'' wrote the poet Robert Browning; now the metaphor has been extended to mean any complicated dispute from which extrication is difficult. However, the idea of embroilment carries neither the drunken stupidity of fiasco nor the venality of scandal, which is why Mr. Reagan's defenders like imbroglio. The President chose an Americanism of obscure origin to give a less serious, more high-spirited connotation to the activity. In a radio address, he asked rhetorically: ''Were we engaged in some kind of shenanigans that blew up in our face?'' That word, first spotted in an 1855 San Francisco publication - ''Are you quite sure? No shenanigan?'' - has a jocular cast of kidding around, perhaps to the point of madcap skulduggery. Only the President has suggested it applies here. Somewhat Vulgar WHEN MAY A NEWSPA-per properly use the slang verb to pee? John Irving, the novelist, called me a few months ago to protest a decision made by The New York Times not to use that widely used euphemism in a book review he had written of ''Seven Rivers West,'' by Edward Hoagland. One of the characters in the lusty tale, which Mr. Irving reviewed favorably, is a trader known for his prowess in long-distance urinating. The reviewer felt it important to refer to the character and his talent. Although authors of the stature of John Irving are cited in dictionaries to illustrate the development and acceptance of words, the following line was published in the Book Review section of The Times: ''The wild journey that only Cecil and Margaret manage to finish ends outside the tent of a trader who's famous for winning bladder-voiding competitions.'' ''The word I wrote was peeing,'' Mr. Irving affirms. ''Totally inoffensive word - a euphemism, in fact, for pissing, a perfectly good English word. To me, bladder-voiding is repellent.'' Grumbling, he went along with the stylistic suggestion, because he wanted the sentence in the review, but wanted me to know that was not his style. I have been noodling that over. Pee is certainly the gentlest of euphemisms, but it is a slang term, and once a publication admits the use of slang in describing bodily functions, it assaults the ramparts of taste. Newspapers that respect their readers' intelligence do not shy from such Standard English words as urinate - it was used in a Times front-page subhead recently in connection with drug testing - but draw the line against using slang words to denote the same function. If the judgment were mine, I would ban pee, not because it is slang but because it is a baby-talk euphemism; instead, I would accept the word for which it substitutes as Standard English (that dread word will be avoided here as ''vulgar''), but most people do not feel as strongly as I do about euphemisms. It's a close call; I am reluctant to condemn editors as bowdlerists who argue that where standard words are available, slang or vulgarisms should be avoided. In Webster's New World Dictionary, however, pee is held to be only ''somewhat vulgar'' and the ''somewhat'' opens the door. Then along came Mario M. Cuomo, Governor of New York, whose 1986 campaign for re-election included an episode that bears directly on this issue. Governor Cuomo, whose early refusal to debate his opponent drew some criticism, was appearing on a radio talk show that took telephone calls from the public. One of the callers was his opponent, Andrew O'Rourke, who sought to engage him in impromptu debate, and the Governor cut him off. Asked to explain his refusal to continue the conversation, Mr. Cuomo was quoted in The Daily News as saying: ''I'm on the radio, minding my business. A guy tries to hit me from behind; he calls up without telling us, and pees on my shoe.'' Should that comment be reported? Yes. A way of reporting it without direct quotation, to avoid printing the slang term, would be this: ''The Governor objected to his opponent's surprise call by comparing it to bladder-voiding on his shoe.'' But that would be silly. Governor Cuomo is a public person making a public statement, on the record. He may one day be President of the United States; if he says ''pees on my shoe,'' that comment deserves to be recorded as much as a picture of Nelson A. Rockefeller making a motion with his middle finger to a crowd of protesters (and that ''single-digit salute'' was printed everywhere). What lesson can we draw from these two instances? That pee is now O.K. to use? No; that's too simple. Safire's Law (I write the ''laws,'' but I don't edit the paper) is this: Slang terms describing bodily functions that can understandably be denoted with standard words should be avoided when possible, but not when such avoidance becomes labored or ludicrous; also, when relatively inoffensive slang terms are used by a responsible and directly quotable news source, such terms may be used in context within quotation marks. John Irving and Mario Cuomo, like the Colonel's Lady and Rosie O'Grady, have under their skins a common zest for the way people speak in real life. Their audiences are not shocked. Without abandoning our standards - indeed, while vigorously resisting most vulgarisms and barnyard epithets as falsely emphatic and in bad taste - I think we should make it possible for artists and political figures to express themselves colloquially.
