957|1987\01\04|SUNDAY OBSERVER|SUPPOSE PRESIDENT Reagan's plan for patching up things with Iran by swapping guns for hostages had succeeded.|SUPPOSE PRESIDENT Reagan's plan for patching up things with Iran by swapping guns for hostages had succeeded. SUPPOSE PRESIDENT Reagan's plan for patching up things with Iran by swapping guns for hostages had succeeded. DEAR AYATOLLAH: Yours of Wednesday last hit the nail squarely on the head. It was silly to keep on fussing over something that happened seven years ago when so many present-day problems can be solved if we cooperate. No, I never heard the old Iranian saying about having to kidnap a few embassies to make an omelet. You in the East are lucky to have so much ancient wisdom to guide you. We are a new country where people think they've heard something wise when somebody says, ''Shoot the sherbert to me, Herbert.''  Yours sincerely, etc. DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: While enjoying the excellent magazine article extolling supply-side economics, which you so kindly enclosed, I was overwhelmed by remorse at not having sent you a comparable gift demonstrative of my affection. I trust you will find the enclosed not unworthy. Gratefully yours, etc. P.S. My translators are puzzled by ''sherbert.'' Its use in connection with a shooting makes me wonder: Might it be a new weapon in your great arsenal of freedom fighting? If so, perhaps you would send a few ''sherberts'' for my inspection. DEAR AYATOLLAH: By golly, it was swell of you to send me the movie about all those fellows being shot, just like in ''Rambo.'' As a guy who was in the industry a long time, can I suggest you tell your producers they can get a nice change of pace by adding some love interest and a few laughs? Who were all those fellows getting shot, anyhow? ''Sherbert'' is a deliberate misspelling of ''sherbet,'' because saying, ''Shoot the sherbet to me, Herbert,'' isn't half as much fun as saying, ''Shoot the sherbert to me, Herbert.''  All best, etc. DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have ordered fervent street demonstrations in praise of your kindness for enclosing the film ''Brother Rat,'' which relates the history of your heroic struggle to succeed at V.M.I. Having watched it myself, I venture to reciprocate with some cinema advice of my own. When your life story is filmed, insist that the great Cary Grant play Ronald Reagan. Incidentally, can you send me ''Bringing Up Baby'' with the great Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn? I am not much for documentaries like ''Brother Rat,'' vital though they are to the masses for an understanding of great men. With all due respect, my friend, those being shot in the film I sent you were scarcely what I would call ''fellows.'' Most were economists, and the rest were malcontents. As for ''sherbet,'' is it merely an icy confection, as my translators say, or is it also the coded Pentagon name for a new weapon such as I might be interested in examining? Yours in fanhood, etc. P.S. Why do we remain so formal when our letters so clearly demonstrate we were always destined to become pen pals? My first name is Ruhollah, and my friends call me Ru. Won't you? DEAR RU: I am sorry to tell you Cary Grant is dead. As a result, there has been a rush on his films at the video rental shops, so I can't get hold of ''Baby.'' I hope the enclosed will keep you entertained for now. Am checking the Pentagon to see if they have something called ''Sherbet'' on the drawing board. Will let you know soonest. Meantime, just call me Ronnie.  Your pal, etc. DEAR RONNIE: I hope my praise for Cary Grant did not inadvertently give offense. If you were compelled to have him shot for harboring ambitions to become an economist, I quite understand. I may be an Ayatollah, but I am still human enough to feel embarrassment if I thoughtlessly offend a pal. Thanks for sending ''Knute Rockne - All-American,'' though I detested it. Why? Because the producer allowed Pat O'Brien to steal the film from my great friend Ronnie. Persuade this O'Brien to visit Iran, and I assure you he will be instantly incarcerated, given a fair trial, and shot. Heard anything yet from the Pentagon?  Devotedly, etc. DEAR RU: Bad news from the Pentagon, I'm afraid. There's no weapon called ''Sherbet.'' Not much other news here, except that Pat O'Brien died three years ago.  As always, etc. RONNIE, BABY: Be a real pal and ask the Pentagon if they've got something called ''Herbert'' coming on line, will you? I hear they sometimes hold out on you unless they think you've got their number. Perhaps you should have more of them shot.  Yours in eternal  friendship, etc.
