958|1987\01\04|THE ISTANBUL SYNAGOGUE MASSACRE|THE last words Gabriel Shaul heard his father say were ''hazak baruch,'' or ''be strong and blessed,'' a congratulatory phrase chanted by the congregation after the reading of a section of the Torah, Judaism's holy book. It was then that Gabriel, age 20, glanced to one side of Neve Shalom Synagogue and saw the terrorist standing in the doorway.|THE last words Gabriel Shaul heard his father say were ''hazak baruch,'' or ''be strong and blessed,'' a congratulatory phrase chanted by the congregation after the reading of a section of the Torah, Judaism's holy book. It was then that Gabriel, age 20, glanced to one side of Neve Shalom Synagogue and saw the terrorist standing in the doorway. THE last words Gabriel Shaul heard his father say were ''hazak baruch,'' or ''be strong and blessed,'' a congratulatory phrase chanted by the congregation after the reading of a section of the Torah, Judaism's holy book. It was then that Gabriel, age 20, glanced to one side of Neve Shalom Synagogue and saw the terrorist standing in the doorway. The terrorist looked about as old as Gabriel. He wore sunglasses and was dressed in black. Gabriel blinked. The terrorist opened fire. Gabriel, who was seated next to his father near the front of the temple, dropped to the floor and hid under a bench. As the terrorist sprayed the synagogue with machine-gun fire, Gabriel felt his father slump down next to him, his face turned away. Gabriel played dead as the deafening sound of machine-gun fire echoed through the vast, newly renovated synagogue. Bodies fell around him. Screams and moans of the worshipers gave way to the voices of the two terrorists yelling instructions at each another in a language Gabriel thought was Arabic. He felt wet and glanced down at his clothes. He was lying in blood. He lay there, motionless, as the terrorists circled the room, firing more bullets into the bodies to insure that the Jews were dead. The terrorist approached his bench. The man in black sprinkled something on his father's leg - a clear fluid that smelled faintly of gasoline. The terrorist struck a match and set Gabriel's father's leg on fire. ''I realized my father was dead when his leg was burning, but he didn't move,'' Gabriel said. GABRIEL SHAUL IS ONE OF seven Jews who survived the terrorist attack last Sept. 6 at Neve Shalom, Istanbul's largest synagogue, whose name means ''oasis of peace.'' The others who had gone there for Saturday services to pray - 22 people, aged 30 to 82 - all were killed. Four months have passed since the Istanbul synagogue massacre and in capitals throughout the West, the verdict of responsibility has been assigned. The incident, it is widely believed, has all the earmarks of Abu Nidal. Abu Nidal, the nom de guerre of Sabry al-Banna, a Palestinian born in Jaffe in 1937, is said to head the Middle East's deadliest terrorist organization. A United States State Department report on the group issued early last year attributes more than 60 terrorist attacks to Abu Nidal in the last eight years, 30 since the beginning of 1984; 20 of the 1985 attacks were in Western Europe. The experts agree that Abu Nidal's group, which calls itself the Fatah Revolutionary Council, was involved in the synagogue massacre, but few who have examined the evidence believe that any single terrorist group could have carried out the attack without state-sponsored logistical support. Indeed, a six-week investigation by this reporter of the attack on the Sabbath worshippers - which turned the elegant Neve Shalom Synagogue into a charred and blood-stained slaughterhouse - points to a far more disturbing conclusion. Interviews with terrorism experts in Paris, London, Jerusalem and Istanbul suggest that the massacre was carried out not by one group, but by several, with the assistance of more than one govern= ment, acting together and sharing responsibilities and a division of terrorist labor. THE ISTANBUL SYNAGOGUE massacre, these sources now believe, reflects the perfection of a new brand of cooperative international terrorism that attempts to leave no fingerprints and whose sponsors are intended to have no address. The evidence to back up this conclusion, while circumstantial, is persuasive. It includes clearly marked Communist-bloc weapons found at the synagogue and at the sites of other terrorist attacks in Turkey, plus information from a terrorist under arrest in Pakistan. This, along with the evidence provided by ballistics, terrorist interrogators, surveillance of clandestine shipments in diplomatic pouches, all point to three states as possible sponsors of the Istanbul carnage: Syria, Libya and Iran. Terrorism experts have conflicting scenarios, and are deeply divided over which country played the leading role in staging the synagogue attack. Israeli experts tend to blame Syria; the Turkish intelligence agency believes that Iran played the dominant role; Turkish police suspect Libya. Some American analysts believe that all three were deeply involved. An Israeli terrorism expert notes that cooperation in the logistics of terrorism has been seen before. ''Libya buys, stores and distributes weapons through its pouch; Syria provides the logistical intelligence and training needed for such an attack; Iran provides the suicide commandos and some funding,'' he said. American intelligence analysts believe that both Syria and Iran played a role in the murderous 1983 attack on the United States Marine barracks in Lebanon, and that Syria, as well as Libya, was involved in the bombing of a West Berlin discotheque last year. Publicly accusing Syria, Libya and Iran of involvement in the synagogue attack could have painful consequences for the Turkish Government. Turkey has long borders with Syria and Iran and has $3 billion in construction projects in Libya, money that Ankara desperately needs. Turkey is not alone in its discomfiture. The Reagan Administration is currently embroiled in a major crisis over clandestine arms shipments to Iran, the last of which was made in October, just a month after the Neve Shalom massacre. So for the moment, it is easier for Turkey, as well as for the United States, to blame the elusive Abu Nidal. (Box, page 47). ''Ask yourself a question,'' said one Israeli terrorism expert who has followed the Turkish investigation closely. ''If a young Irish woman had gotten aboard that El Al jet in London last April, if she and her unborn baby and some 375 other passengers had been blown to bits over Austria, if we had never learned that there was a Palestinian named Hindawi who could be traced directly to Syria's doorstep, whom do you think we would have blamed for the bombing?'' the expert said. ''It would have been blamed on Abu Nidal.'' ''When an attack succeeds,'' he concluded, ''it's Abu Nidal. When it fails, we discover that it was Syria, or Iran, or Libya.'' Although unwilling to declare its suspicions publicly because of diplomatic pressures and fear of further terrorist incidents, Turkey has recently taken highly unusual steps to thwart future terrorist attacks. In November, Ankara quietly expelled a Syrian diplomat and two diplomats from Iran suspected of involvement in the 1985 murder of a Jordanian diplomat - also blamed on Abu Nidal. Though it was never said publicly, the diplomats were also suspected by some Turkish officials of complicity in the Istanbul synagogue massacre. ALTHOUGH IT IS surrounded by Arab and Moslem states and 99 percent of its people are Moslems, Turkey was one of the first states in the region to recognize Israel, back in early 1950. The Israeli flag flies openly over its consulate in Ankara, the capital, and Turkey, whose 22,000 Jews have been relatively well treated over the centuries, has open, but low-key commercial and tourist exchanges with Israel. There are also important but unpublicized forms of cooperation between the countries. Turkish and Israeli police and intelligence agents, for example, often work closely together. Within hours after the attack on the Neve Shalom Synagogue, therefore, Israeli and American experts were working quietly with Turkish police, hunting for clues to the identity of the terrorists, combing through the debris, interrogating witnesses to the attack. What soon became frighteningly clear was that they had precious little to go on. ''This was a highly professional operation,'' said Yildirim Akbulut, Turkey's Minister of the Interior, in an interview in Ankara. Professionalism, in this case, meant that almost no clues to the identity of the terrorists were left behind. Nevertheless, the Turkish police and the Turkish intelligence agency soon came to some preliminary conclusions. First, Interior Minister Akbulut says that the operation was almost certainly a suicide mission. According to initial press reports, the terrorists had attacked the synagogue's congregation with hand grenades and machine guns. But the investigation by Turkey has revealed that the terrorists killed worshippers with machine-gun bullets; they reserved the hand grenades for blowing themselves up after they had completed their grisly mission. What is more, survivors said that the terrorists barred an interior door of the synagogue, which leads investigators to believe that no one, including the terrorists, was meant to escape. The terrorists' grenades were extremely powerful and, some intelligence agents believe, may have had specially rigged short fuses for immediate detonation rather than the standard three- to five-second delay that enables a grenade to be aimed and thrown. The force of the blasts blew apart the terrorists' bodies, splattering pieces of their flesh everywhere on the synagogue's freshly stuccoed and painted walls. The grenades so mangled the terrorists' bodies that identification proved extremely difficult. One terrorist apparently held his grenade close to his head, which Turkish police found blasted into the top of the synagogue's vaulted ceiling, more than 40 feet overhead. The second terrorist - and Turkish police believe there were only two assailants inside the synagogue - held the grenade to his stomach. All that remained of him were a mutilated torso and head, and the remnants of two legs, below the knees. Based on this information, plus descriptions of the terrorists provided by eyewitnesses inside the synagogue - among them, Gabriel Shaul -Turkish police made composite drawings of their faces, which were published in all the Turkish newspapers. To prevent identification of the country in which the terrorists' clothes had been purchased, the labels of every item of clothing had been cut out, apparently with a razor blade. Saffet Arikan Beduk, chief of the Turkish police and Director General for Security, said that his agents had found two clues suggesting that the assailants had been in Turkey for at least a day or two, and probably longer, before the massacre: a pair of Turkish-made tennis shoes on one of the terrorists, and a Turkish-made towel that had been used to cover the top of the satchel in which the terrorists, posing as photographers, had carried their machine guns and grenades into the synagogue. Mr. Beduk said that his agents had visited almost every store where that brand of towel and tennis shoes were sold - literally ''hundreds of stores,'' he said. ''We've had no luck.'' One police investigator said that the authorities had also concluded, despite the scant information available, that the terrorists were definitely Moslems, probably Arabs. ''First, Jews in the synagogue heard them speaking Arabic,'' said a Western agent close to the investigation. ''Second,'' he added, ''autopsies showed that they were both circumcised.'' Moslems, like Jews, insist on this practice for religious reasons. Police painstakingly pieced together the extant parts of the two terrorists' bodies, including tiny pieces of the fingers of one of the murderers to obtain partial fingerprints. These prints, along with actual photographs of the head of one assailant and the drawings of both, were sent to Interpol, the French-based international crime-fighting organization. But Western officials confirm that the agency has not been able to provide a positive identification of either terrorist. Nevertheless, Turkish police recently scored something of a breakthrough when a vital tip was provided by Pakistan, which has close ties with Turkey. The day before the Istanbul massacre, four terrorists stormed and attempted to hijack a Pan American jet at the airport in Karachi before they were overcome by Pakistani commando units. Although one of the terrorists carried a Libyan passport and is believed to be a Libyan national, Pakistani police and intelligence officials say that the hijackers are Palestinians trained in Lebanon and that some of them have links to Abu Nidal. During their interrogation, which is believed to have been physically punishing, Pakistani police showed the composite drawing of the two Istanbul terrorists to the hijackers. One of the hijackers claimed to recognize one of the photos. He told Pakistani police that it was of an Arab, one of the young men who had been trained in Syrian-controlled Lebanon - by Abu Nidal. The hijacker said he had never known the dead man's name or country of origin, but he recognized him by a peculiar scar on what was left of his face. ANOTHER IMPORTANT clue to the sponsors of the synagogue attack was the weapons that the terrorists left behind. Turkish police found more than 100 spent cartridges on the floor of the synagogue, two machine guns that they said were Polish-made, and seven unexploded Soviet-made grenades, a few of which were apparently defective. These weapons, some of which were the same type as those found in an attempted bombing of an American officers' club in Ankara last spring, have prompted Turkish police to suspect Libyan involvement in the synagogue raid. Libyan sponsorship of terrorism in Turkey has been a politically thorny problem for the Turks, Western officials said and Turkish authorities acknowledged. Turkish intelligence agencies have long kept Libya's diplomats under careful surveillence. Months before the attack on the synagogue, Turkish officials were quietly monitoring the weapons, false passports and identification papers that Libya routinely sent into Turkey through embassy pouches and mail. After the United States bombed Tripoli in April in reprisal for suspected Libyan-sponsored terrorism, Turkey, fearing that Libya would try to strike at the United States through its substantial military presence in Turkey, stepped up this routine surveillance of Libyan diplomats and offices. Three days after the American bombing, two Libyans who had been loitering at the United States officers' club in Ankara were arrested and charged with attempting to blow up the club by planting grenades on the building's roof. The grenades they were carrying, like those in the synagogue, were Soviet-made. Soon after the arrests at the officers' club, Robert Strausz-Hupe, United States Ambassador to Turkey, visited Turkish officials and demanded action against Libya's Ambassador, the deputy chief of mission and the head of the consulate in Ankara. The American Ambassador gave the Turks evidence that these three Libyan diplomats had been involved in the bungled terrorist attack on the officers' club. ''The Americans presented irrefutable proof that the weapons for the raid had been stored and distributed by the Libyans,'' said one Western source. ''They demanded the immediate expulsion of all three and asked Turkey to close the People's Bureaus'' - the name Libya uses for its diplomatic offices. Fearful of angering Libya through a public expulsion, Turkey quietly prevailed upon Libya to withdraw its emissaries. In midsummer, Libyan Ambassador Mohammad Abdul Malik, who was expelled from the United States in 1980 for similar terrorist activities and from Switzerland in 1983, and Ali M. Al-Zayyani, his deputy, left Turkey for ''reassignment.'' The consul in Ankara has remained. In November, Mr. Malik quietly returned to Turkey, ostensibly to buy some property for a nephew. As of mid-December, he was still in Ankara, Western sources said. The grenades found on the terrorists outside the officers' club were the same make and model as those found inside the Neve Shalom Synagogue, Chief of Police Beduk confirmed in an interview. About a month before the Istanbul massacre, Turkish police found a cache of weapons - grenades and machine guns - in a satchel in the Belgrade Forest, a wooded area on the outskirts of Istanbul. The weapons had clearly been left for a covert pickup, according to Turkish police. The police staked out the site for a month. When no (Continued on Page 32) pickup occurred, they recovered the bag shortly before the synagogue attack and analyzed the grenades and machine guns. What intrigued them were the machine guns. They weapons came in four parts, presumably to be assembled by their users. The serial numbers had been scratched out. In their place was a hand-carved number; the same number had been etched into each part of the machine gun, with a different number for each gun. This, Turkish police say, would enable the terrorists to smuggle the pieces in individually; they could then be collected and assembled shortly before use. Police Chief Beduk said the two machine guns found inside the Neve Shalom Synagogue also had their serial numbers removed. On one of the guns, the number ''11'' had been hand-etched into each of its four parts. Both sets of weapons were 9-millimeter, rapid-fire Makarov models. By subjecting the weapons found in the Belgrade Forest and those found at the synagogue to infrared analysis, Turkish police, with Western assistance, were able to identify the original serial numbers of the guns. According to Mr. Beduk, there could be no doubt that the weapons were from the same series. The grenades found in the forest were the same type as those used at the synagogue. They were also the same type as those found at the failed Libyan attack against the American officers' club. Those grenades had been supplied by Libya. Y ET ANOTHER CLUE to the origins of the synagogue massacre was developed during an investigation by the Turkish police of an earlier terrorist attack - the murder in July 1985 of Ziad al-Sati, a first secretary at the Jordanian Embassy in Ankara who is a relative of Zaid Bin Shaker, a senior Jordanian military officer and King Hussein's closest friend and adviser. The identity of the killers was only recently discovered, thanks to the synagogue investigation. After the synagogue attack, Turkish police rounded up for questioning more than 80 of the some 2,500 to 3,000 Palestinians in Turkey. In November, Turkish authorities formally charged six of them with the murder of Mr. Sati. All six Palestinian students, the indictment stated, had confessed to being members of the Abu Nidal group, which, the prosecutor alleged officially for the first time, had also carried out the synagogue attack. But Abu Firaz, head of the Palestine Liberation Organization office in Ankara, asserted that the students had been ''tortured'' into making their confessions. P.L.O. sources say the arrests enraged Abu Firaz because the students had been working for him. Their mission, the P.L.O. says, was to infiltrate the Abu Nidal group for Abu Firaz, so that he could help Turkish police smash the organization in Turkey, which had attempted four times to kill him and other P.L.O. officials here. Some experts suspect that Abu Firaz may be a double agent - that he works not only for the P.L.O., but also for Abu Nidal, the P.L.O.'s sworn enemy. ''Here is a good example of why it's impossible in this part of the world to know who is working for whom,'' said Ertugrul Ozkok, Ankara bureau chief of Hurriyet, a leading Turkish newspaper. Whomever they were working for, the arrested students (Continued on Page 36) provided Turkish police with information that led directly to the Syrian and Iranian Embassies. In mid-November, the Turks arrested Adnan Ameri, a translator at the Jordanian Embassy who confessed to having worked for Syrian intelligence. His control officer, he said, was a Syrian diplomat in Turkey who had given the order to have Mr. Sati assassinated. Syria, Mr. Ameri said in a public statement, had ordered the Abu Nidal group to carry out the murder. On Nov. 21, Mohammed Darwichi Baladi, a second secretary at the Syrian Embassy, left Turkey only hours before a prosecutor accused him publicly of involvement in the Sati murder. Ali Kent, a Turk of Iranian origin, was arrested at the same time as Mr. Ameri. He had rented the car used to gun down the Jordanian. Mr. Kent identified himself as the chief administrator and liaison for Islamic Jihad, the Lebanese-based Shiite Moslem extremist group that has close ties to Iran. His goal, he said, was to destabilize Turkey and spread the fervor of the Iranian revolution there. Working closely with Syria, along with Iranian cover groups, Mr. Kent said that he had staged many clandestine operations in Turkey. In late December, two Iranian diplomats left Turkey at the Turkish Government's request. A statement by the Turkish Foreign Ministry said only that the two had abused their diplomatic status by attempting to ''recruit men to fight against the Turkish secular system.'' The indictments against Mr. Ameri and Mr. Kent mark the first time that members of the Abu Nidal group and of the extremist Iranian-dominated Islamic Jihad organization have been publicly linked to a terrorist attack in Turkey. While the charge against them is the murder of a Jordanian diplomat, Turkish officials now suspect that a similar collaboration took place in the staging of the Istanbul synagogue massacre. Turkish and Western officials cite ample motive for Syrian and Iranian involvement in the Neve Shalom attack. Relations between Syria and Turkey have long been strained by Turkey's belief that Damascus has been training and arming Armenian terrorists, known by the acronym ASALA, and infiltrating them across the border and into Western Europe for attacks against Turkey and Turkish targets. Syria, moreover, is obsessed with stopping Turkey's construction of the Ataturk Dam, a 2,400-megawatt dam on the Euphrates River. When completed in the early 1990's, Ataturk, along with two other Turkish dams, would have the capability of cutting off most of Syria's source of fresh water and electricity, should Ankara choose to do so. Among the names and items Turkish police found in the apartment of Mr. Ameri, Syria's confessed agent, according to officials, were maps of the dams on the Euphrates, plus a notebook containing records of payments to three Turkish night guards at one of the dams. Police have arrested all three guards, Turkish officials say. Relations between Iran and Turkey are equally troubled, if not more so. Iran is a major supporter of the insurgent Kurdish Workers Party, known as P.K.K., which has been fighting to establish independence from Turkey and Iraq, Iran's bitter enemy in their protracted war. Teheran was enraged, diplomatic sources say, when Turkish planes bombed a P.K.K. camp in Iraq last summer, destroying huge caches of Iranian-supplied equipment. Finally, Turkey, a Western-oriented secular republic, is an alternative political and economic model of development for the Middle East, one that could prove more attractive to the world's Moslems than the Ayatollah Khomeini's authoritarian Islamic regime. Ankara bitterly resents Iran's infiltration into Turkey of fundamentalist proponents and literature. The Turkish Government feels that it must be cautious with both of its neighbors. Some 3,500 trucks travel between Iran and Turkey each day. Turkish officials admit to the presence of some 20,000 Iranians in Turkey. But Western authorities said that the total is actually between a million and 2 million. If Iran began a serious attempt to destabilize Turkey, (Continued on Page 47) preventive action would be extremely difficult. Thus Turkey has chosen to play down the strains with Damascus and Teheran. This means that rather than publicly expelling known terrorists operating under diplomatic cover, such agents are quietly pressed to leave. In some cases, nothing is done. But Syria and Iran must also be cautious in their dealings with Ankara, which has a large military establishment, a well-trained army, and a well-deserved reputation for toughness. So rather than stage terrorist activities openly, Western intelligence (Continued on Page 52) and Turkish officials say, Syria and Iran prefer to use surrogates for their more daring operations. Iran's is Islamic Jihad, among others. The most prominent among Syria's terrorist surrogates is Abu Nidal. I N AN INTERVIEW IN the Bekaa Valley, Atef Abu Bakr, Abu Nidal's spokesman, said that the group always claimed responsibility for its actions; it has not claimed the synagogue attack. And while Abu Nidal has sent many young terrorists on missions from which there was little likelihood of return, such as the December 1985 attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports, he has not been known to stage overt suicide missions. It is this fact that has led some counterterrorism experts to doubt that Abu Nidal's group alone is responsible for the synagogue massacre. Just as individual members of Islamic Jihad and the Abu Nidal group appear to have cooperated in the murder of the Jordanian diplomat last year, individuals from these two groups, paid by the sponsors, Iran and Syria and Libya, may have joined forces, or shared tasks, in the Istanbul attack, some experts believe. Such cooperation would be unusual, experts note, but not unprecedented. Robert B. Oakley, recently appointed by Frank C. Carlucci to head the National Security Council's office of Middle East affairs, said there were reliable reports that Syria and Iran had both helped stage the attack in late 1983 against the American Marine barracks in Lebanon, in which more than 240 Marines died. This kind of fluid interchange of surrogates and host countries seems to be on the rise. In the twin attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports in late 1985, terrorist experts believe there is evidence of participation by Syria, Libya and Palestinians from the Bekaa Valley. The bombing attack in April of the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin, in which two American soldiers were killed, seems to have been supported not only by Libya, as the Reagan Administration charged, but by Syria as well. The murderous attack on the Pan Am jet in Karachi last September appears to be the work of groups in Lebanon, perhaps aided by Abu Nidal, with a Libyan connection. ''Terrorists seem to be learning that it is simply harder to fix responsibility if more than one group and country is involved,'' said Mr. Oakley, who was formerly head of the State Department's office of counterterrorism. The perfection of this new kind of untraceable terror was the Istanbul synagogue attack. ''We can go on forever searching for Abu Nidal,'' said one Israeli official, ''or we can start right now to assign blame where it belongs - on the states that sponsor such actions.''  THE EVIDENCE The massacre at the Neve Shalom Synagogue in Istanbul, some experts believe, is an example of a new kind of cooperative terrorism in which several groups, backed by more than one government, work together. Turkish investigators suspect the involvement of Libya, Syria and Iran. The weapons used in the synagogue were the same type as some of those supplied by Libya to terrorists for an attack on an American officers' club in Ankara in April. A terrorist arrested while attempting to hijack a plane in Karachi recognized one of the two synagogue attackers from a composite sketch as an Arab trained by Abu Nidal in Syrian-controlled Lebanon. And their investigation of the assassination of a Jordanian diplomat has led Turkish police to believe that the Iranian-dominated Islamic Jihad group was also involved in the synagogue killings.  WHO IS ABUL NIDAL? There is disagreement over what he looks like, conjecture as to whether he is in charge of his own organization and even rumors that he is no longer alive. But most terrorism experts believe that Abu Nidal does indeed exist. Yet while his name has become synonymous with terror itself, little is known about this elusive man or the inner workings of his group, the Fatah Revolutuionary Council. It is known that his real name is Sabry al-Banna. There are few photos of him, and some may be fakes. Salah Khalaf, the No. 2 man in the Palestine Liberation Organization, says that Abu Nidal has undergone plastic surgery at least six times to disguise his appearance (photos below). His current whereabouts are in dispute. A British intelligence source says that Abu Nidall was seen last month in Damascus; others say Lybia, still others say he travels most of the time. ''Frankly, we don't know where the hell he is,' said one American diplomat. Abu Nidal has reportedly had persistent health problems, aggravated by chain-smoking -- he is said to have smoked as many as four packs of cigarettes a day. In a recently published biography of Abu Nidal, the Israeli journalist Yossi Melman claims that the world's chief terrorist has had at least three heart operations. Many in his 300 to 500-member group are Palestinian students. Abu Nidal is said to recruit from his own region those linked to him by family loyalty, a strong bond in Arab circles. Members are reputedly well-paid; should they die during a mission, their families are provided for. There is no leaving the organization -- the only escape is death. The Fatah Revolutionary Council reportedly took root in the mid-1970's in Baghdad, where Abu Nidal was head of the Palestine Liberation Organization's office until he broke off from the P.L.O. over Yasir Arafat's moderate policies. His first base was in Baghdad, but Iraq, under pressure from France and the United States, forced him out in the early 1980's. He moved to Damascus, where the group maintains a ''cultural center.'' It has bases in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa Valley of Lebanon, in Lybia and moves freely in East Europe. Ariel Merari, chief terrorism analyst at Tel Aviv University, says that Abu Nidal's group has become increasingly mercenary, working more to compensate host states for their services than for ideological goals. The group has been impossible to infiltrate, the analyst says, because it operates through small cells isolated from one another. Some Western intelligence experts believe that Abu Nidal may not actually run the organization. One Israeli expert believes that the real chief is a Syrian intelligence officer. A French expert suspects that the secret chief is a senior P.L.O. official, who, unbeknownst to Yasir Arafat, has for years been attempting to undermine the P.L.O by secretly directing the most bloodthirsty of the operations attributed to Abu Nidal. Despite the group's denials of the synagogue massacre, it has consistently attacked Turkey as a ''fascist junta'' in its weekly magazine, Palestine al-Thawra, published in Arabic in Damascus. The magazine routinely publishes news and communiques of the Kurdish rebels and Armenian terrorists, Turkey's enemies. Abu Nidal's spokesman, Atel Abu Bakr, said in a recent interview in the Bekaa Valley that more operations were in store. He threatened Jewish cultural and religious institutions in Europe where Jews, he said, were using synagogues as covers for ''Zionist espionage activities.'' -- J.M.
