959|1987\01\04|Science on the Track of God|''Have you ever thought, Angelica,'' said Persse, ''what a remarkable thing it is that the moon and the sun look to our eyes approximately the same size? . . . The odds against its happening like that by chance must be billions to one.''  ''You don't think it was chance?''  ''I think it's one of the great proofs of a divine creator,'' said Persse.|''Have you ever thought, Angelica,'' said Persse, ''what a remarkable thing it is that the moon and the sun look to our eyes approximately the same size? . . . The odds against its happening like that by chance must be billions to one.''  ''You don't think it was chance?''  ''I think it's one of the great proofs of a divine creator,'' said Persse. ''Have you ever thought, Angelica,'' said Persse, ''what a remarkable thing it is that the moon and the sun look to our eyes approximately the same size? . . . The odds against its happening like that by chance must be billions to one.''  ''You don't think it was chance?''  ''I think it's one of the great proofs of a divine creator,'' said Persse. ''I think He had an eye for symmetry.''  - David Lodge, ''Small World'' Sure, it's easy to make fun. Our planet flies through space more smoothly than any airplane, covered with water yet never spilling a drop, so it must have had a Designer. Our eyes display too complex an architecture to be reached by random mutations, so they must have had a Biological Engineer. New York City offers a brilliantly conceived breeding ground for cockroaches; surely, therefore, we can deduce the existence of a cockroach deity. The so-called argument from design - from design, that is, to the existence of God - had barely been thought up before it was being satirized, and you can't always tell the serious versions from the parodies. But lately, science has been upping the ante. No one cares anymore that the moon is unusually large. Nowadays, we have incredibly well-tuned constants of fundamental physics - to name just one, the gravitational force, which, if put ever-so-slightly out of whack, would have turned the universe into a collection of red dwarf stars or blue giant stars, either way presumably inhospitable to life. When modern cosmologists calculate the odds against life as we know it, they no longer speak of ''billions to one.'' They toss around numbers like 1040, or 10301, or 10 to the 10 to the 30th, a number that cannot even be typeset without either two levels of superscript or a universe full of zeroes. For most of the last millennium, science and faith have been enemies. Science explains. Faith likes the inexplicable. Amid the agnostic throng, few scientists talk openly about belief in God. Even so, as science moves toward its Grand Unified Theory and other grails, some of its practitioners have been seeing an argument for God in the esoterica of high-energy physics. They feel that somewhere in these cosmological coincidences, and in the accumulating perfection of mathematics, lies the evidence of design that cannot be explained away. Perhaps, they feel, science is finally reaching a level of knowledge that will confirm God, instead of rendering Him superfluous. This is the argument that gets its most vigorous airing in John Updike's new novel, ''Roger's Version.'' Though never quite so earnest, never quite so garrulous about it, some practicing scientists really do share at least a part of the feeling of Updike's pallid, pimpled antagonist, a computer scientist named Dale Kohler. ''The most miraculous thing is happening,'' he says. ''The physicists are getting down to the nitty-gritty, they've really just about pared things down to the ultimate details, and the last thing they ever expected to happen is happening. God is showing through.'' Updike's version contains its share of parody, to be sure. It also assembles the richest hodgepodge of scientific shop talk to be found anywhere in fiction - absolutely authentic in its slangy allusions to fractals and cellular automata and the Mandelbrot set. Dale Kohler knows his science, and he cannot be laughed at when he says, ''They've been scraping away at physical reality all these centuries, and now the layer of the little left we don't understand is so fine God's face is staring right out at us.'' He just wants to finish the job. Absurd, of course. Yet in the nonfictional world, scientists' writings are letting slip the occasional claim that things may be coming to a head. The physicist Paul Davies: ''Right or wrong, the fact that science has actually advanced to the point where what were formerly religious questions can be seriously tackled, itself indicates the far-reaching consequences of the new physics.'' Another physicist, Alan Lightman: ''Of all people today, I think scientists have the deepest faith in the unseen world. The greater the scientist, the deeper his faith. . . . It's a special brand of faith. You might say that the scientist sees God as a mathematician.'' Meanwhile, the distinguished journal Nature has lately carried a strange colloquy about miracles. R. J. Berry, a professor of genetics at the University of London and a member of the General Synod of the Church of England, set off much debate with a long commentary on what scientists should believe. Recognize that science has limits, he argued. Evaluate apparent miracles with proper scientific skepticism, but allow for the possibility that ''miracles are a necessary but unpredictable consequence of a God who holds the world in being.'' These scientists do not quite contend that science can prove God. To the extent that there is a middle ground, it is expressed by Berry. ''I think there is a certain disenchantment with good old-fashioned humanism slash materialism slash whatever-you-want-to-call-it.'' But when it comes to the argument from design, the problem is that science has a way of finding explanations after all. ''You go and look at a sunset on top of a nice hill, and to me I'm looking at God's handiwork,'' says Berry. ''But I wouldn't want to use it to prove God, because there's always a mechanical explanation.'' Actually, for every scientist putting forward modernized versions of the argument from design, there is another one stripping it of its last claims to respectability. While those with faith stress how inexplicably congenial are the fundamental constants of nature, like the gravitational force, others choose to stress how self-organization emerges spontaneously in complex systems, how chaos gives birth to order, pattern, structure. And evolutionary biologists have come far in explaining how eyes, wings, fingernails and brains all could arise without divine intervention. Science does eventually manage to explain -that's the problem. In biology, the explanations often turn out to be less highfalutin than the questions. The mathematician Ronald Graham expresses a sensible understanding of the human brain when he says: ''It didn't really evolve for the purpose of trying to understand the space-time continuum or look at things in a hundred thousand dimensions. It was there to keep you out of the rain and help you figure out where the berries are.'' Only in mathematics itself, really, does the process of discovery always seem to peel away the gauze obscuring something like the work of God. Mathematics is beauty at its rawest. But the question about mathematical beauty is always this: Is it created or discovered? How much is reality and how much human interpretation? ''Most of us feel that it's already there and we're just discovering it,'' says Graham. ''Then the question becomes, where do you draw the line? Was Beethoven discovering the 'Waldstein' Sonata or did he create it?'' A mathematician would answer, half-seriously, that the ideas were already there and the implementation was Beethoven's. Proof, though, is serious, and nowadays the business of proof has been turned over to mathematicians, except for the part remaining in the hands of trial lawyers. Clerics no longer prove, divinity professors no longer prove, even philosophers are out of the proof game. In the old days, when the argument from design first got around, people argued just as fervently that God must exist because everybody believes in Him, or that God must exist because moral behavior exists. These arguments have faded, mercifully. Most people don't even want a God who can be proved - a fathomable, graspable God, or, as Updike puts it, ''a God Who lets Himself be intellectually trapped.'' Proof leaves no room for faith. Why look to science at all then? I think it may be a matter of turf. God's turf is the unseen, of course, and nowadays the unseen, the mysterious, the inexplicable, the profound - these dark things belong, not to the theologian, but to the scientist.
