960|1987\01\04|SAM NUNN'S RISING STAR|IN MID-DECEMBER, A SHORT MONTH after they had retaken the United States Senate, Democrats were feeling buoyant, perhaps nowhere more so than on an Amtrak train heading from Washington to Williamsburg, Va. The Democratic Leadership Council, a group of younger leaders dedicated to moving their party to the right, had chartered the train to take members, their families and the press corps to a conference at which the council would discuss ideas for regaining the White House.|IN MID-DECEMBER, A SHORT MONTH after they had retaken the United States Senate, Democrats were feeling buoyant, perhaps nowhere more so than on an Amtrak train heading from Washington to Williamsburg, Va. The Democratic Leadership Council, a group of younger leaders dedicated to moving their party to the right, had chartered the train to take members, their families and the press corps to a conference at which the council would discuss ideas for regaining the White House. IN MID-DECEMBER, A SHORT MONTH after they had retaken the United States Senate, Democrats were feeling buoyant, perhaps nowhere more so than on an Amtrak train heading from Washington to Williamsburg, Va. The Democratic Leadership Council, a group of younger leaders dedicated to moving their party to the right, had chartered the train to take members, their families and the press corps to a conference at which the council would discuss ideas for regaining the White House. The train was chock-a-block with new Democratic stars - Florida Gov. Bob Graham, just elected to the Senate, and former Virginia Gov. Charles S. Robb, frequently mentioned as a 1988 Presidential or Vice-Presidential prospect. And on the first car, so surrounded by party officials and television cameras that he was virtually unable to move, sat Sam Nunn Jr., the senior Senator from Georgia, the Democrats' principal spokesman on defense, an unprepossessing man who had never attracted much national attention. Until now. ''How's it going, Mr. President?'' several well-wishers asked Nunn as they joined the throng. He greeted the queries with a weak smile. Near the end of the three-hour journey, Nunn tried to make his way to the next car, where his wife, Colleen, patiently waited. He never made it. With each step, he was stopped by someone wanting to know if he intended to run for President. The Senator gave the same humorless, verbatim response each time: ''I'm not leaning toward it, but I will make a decision by the end of January.'' Later, at the conference, Nunn opened his speech on defense policy with a bit of deadpan: ''I've been asked to demonstrate some charisma, by talking about throw-weight, hardened silos, megatonnage and MIRV's.'' His remark drew laughter, but it also teased a question that many Democrats are asking: Is Sam Nunn too smart, too conservative and too dull to be President? The more intriguing question may be whether Nunn, a man who has come reluctantly to political prominence in recent months, really wants to be President. Nunn, who is about to realize his ambition of becoming chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, long has been recognized as his party's leader on national security. The 48-year-old lawyer has left his mark on almost every major military and foreign-policy issue of 1986. Recently, as President Reagan has struggled with the controversy over the Iran-contra arms sale scandal, Nunn has been widely acclaimed for his role in leading his party's early response. It was Nunn, in an interview following the President's first news conference after the controversy broke, who advised the President to empanel a group of ''wise men'' to review the policy-making process inside the White House; Mr. Reagan accepted the advice a few days later. And it was the Senator from Georgia who, in perfect political pitch, cautioned Democrats to avoid the temptation to exploit the situation politically. ''He's certainly the clear winner in what could turn out to be a national tragedy,'' said Ann F. Lewis, national director of Americans for Democratic Action, the liberal policy group. ''If Sam Nunn didn't exist today, we'd have to invent him - a Southerner who rises above politics in times of crisis.'' But, added Ms. Lewis, ''the ability to rise above politics that makes him so effective could hamper him as a Presidential candidate.'' NEITHER A STRIKING PRESENCE nor an inspiring speaker, the bespectacled lawmaker combs his thinning brown hair over a bald spot and speaks in a flat drawl. He has never employed a Washington campaign consultant to advise him on his image or on issues. And his voting record - he is one of President Reagan's strongest Democratic supporters in the Senate - is disconcerting to many Democrats. For most Presidential aspirants, these handicaps could be insurmountable. But in Nunn's case, they have only added to the growing curiosity. And his leadership on national defense and his tough anti-Soviet foreign policy have effectively thrust him into the public eye. In a two-week period between the November elections and the eruption of the controversy over the Iran arms sale and the diversion of money to the Nicaraguan contras, Nunn was swamped with almost 100 interview requests - an extraordinary number for a Senator. The press interest forced Nunn to do something he has rarely done in his 13-year Senate career: hold a Washington news conference. When he strode into the crowded conference room in the Capitol, several reporters began humming ''Hail to the Chief,'' musical fanfare that has officially graced the entrances of only one Georgian, Jimmy Carter. There are important differences between the Senator and the former President, of course. Jimmy Carter was an outsider, but Sam Nunn is a consummate political insider who has cultivated close personal relationships with members of the Washington establishment. (On weekends, Nunn, one of the Senate's best golfers, can usually be found in the company of Washington powerbrokers on the Congressional Country Club links.) But there are also similarities. Both Carter and Nunn are technocrats, masters of complex detail. Many political insiders wonder whether Nunn, like Carter, will founder on the shoals of detail. Indeed, Nunn has yet to demonstrate the capacity to inspire and move voters by articulating broad themes of national purpose. A serious man, Nunn refuses to seek political advantage where others rush in. For example, when his press secretary asked Nunn - a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee who has spent much of his time recently in closed hearings on the Iran arms affair - whether Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, the former White House national security adviser, had invoked the Fifth Amendment before the committee, Nunn told his aide: ''I can't discuss what happened in the committee.'' Yet there is a folksier aspect to Sam Nunn's personality. Several months ago, during a trip to rural Georgia, Nunn told a gathering of local farmers about the ''big-city politician who visits a farm and accidentally steps in manure.'' The politician, recounted Nunn, ''looked down at his feet and cried, 'Oh my God, I'm melting!' '' SAM NUNN IS A MAN OF CONTRADICTIONS. HIS politics and Senate career have been marked by extreme caution and deference. He goes out of his way to avoid confrontations and to compromise on controversial issues. But at his big, rambling split-level house in Bethesda, Md., he displays the fiercely competitive side of his nature that friends and family have known for years. Recently, a reporter and a photographer from The Atlanta Constitution convinced Nunn to engage his 17-year-old son, Brian, in a game of backyard basketball. Soon, the Senator's incessant chatter rattled the boy, forcing him to miss a one-handed shot, and Nunn aggressively grabbed the rebound. Reviewing the scene, the reporter, Hal Straus, wrote: ''The impromptu basketball game had started as a setup for a photo session. Like almost everything Sam Nunn is involved in, though, it had quickly become serious.'' Nunn is so serious, in fact, that when playing Trivial Pursuit with his 20-year-old daughter, Michelle, he has even been known to question the answers on the game cards. A classic overachiever, even in high school Nunn was showing the residents of Perry, a small town of 10,000 in central Georgia, the qualities that would drive his political career. He was a superior Eagle Scout, an honor student and captain of his high-school basketball team, leading it to a state championship despite his weak legs. ''For two years,'' he recalled, ''my mother would wrap my ankles every day for basketball practice.'' Nunn's family was part of Perry's social and political aristocracy. Sam Nunn Sr., a formal man with a passion for reading, who died in 1965, was a lawyer, a farmer, a one-time mayor of Perry and a top officer in the town's major savings and loan institution. As a boy, Sam Jr. would sit enraptured while his father discussed politics with some of Georgia's political barons, men such as Representative Carl Vinson, Nunn's great uncle and a lawmaker who amassed enormous power in his 51 years in the House, much of that time as chairman of the Armed Services Committee. After studying at Georgia Tech, Nunn earned a law degree from Emory University, then served stints in the Coast Guard and on the staff of Vinson's House Armed Services Committee in Washington. In 1964, he returned to Perry to pursue a political career; four years later, he was elected to the Georgia legislature. In 1972, at age 33 and with his statewide name recognition at only 2 percent, Nunn embarked on a long-shot campaign to win the United States Senate seat vacated by the death of Richard B. Russell. He won the Democratic primary, and then faced Fletcher S. Thompson, a conservative Republican, who plastered the state with posters linking Nunn to Senator George McGovern, the liberal Democratic Presidential nominee that year. To appeal to rural white voters, Nunn flew to Montgomery, Ala., to receive the endorsement of Gov. George C. Wallace, the most prominent symbol of the South's resistance to racial desegregation. ''George Wallace represents the real views of Georgians,'' Nunn said in Montgomery, echoing Wallace's attacks on ''judicial tyranny'' and court-ordered school busing. Before election day, Nunn traveled to Washington to lay claim to a seat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, a panel once headed by Russell and a source of political strength in Georgia, where the economy depends heavily on military installations and defense contractors. Carl Vinson, by then retired from the Congress, introduced his nephew to some of the most powerful men in the Senate, including Henry M. Jackson of Washington State and John C. Stennis of Mississippi, who later would become Nunn's mentors. They were impressed by the young candidate's eagerness to join Armed Services at a time when the Vietnam War had made the military an unpopular institution. Nunn returned to Georgia with a promise of a seat on the committee, and used the informal commitment to his advantage in the final stages of the campaign. He won the election with 54 percent of the vote. NUNN'S VICTORY BELIED the long-shot odds political pundits had placed on him, primarily because of his sober mien and nearly complete lack of charisma. To make himself look more appealing to voters in 1972, ''I was told I had to get rid of my black horn-rimmed glasses,'' Nunn recalled. ''After a day of wearing wire-rimmed glasses, I had a headache and they just about ruined my nose. I said I'll either get elected with my comfortable glasses or I'll be defeated with them.'' His style since coming to Washington has remained aggressively staid. At the end of his 10- to 12-hour days, he usually heads home to be with his family. He rarely attends cocktail parties or luncheons with lobbyists, and until last year he resisted becoming a national figure. ''I don't know of anyone up here who has less ego or cares less about publicity,'' said one Democratic Senator. In 1982, Nunn was the first choice of Senate Democratic leaders to give the party's views on national defense in response to President Reagan's State of the Union address. ''Most Democratic Senators were fighting to get a piece'' of the prime-time television exposure, said Greg Schneiders, currently a Democratic consultant who at that time was an aide to Robert C. Byrd, the Senate Democratic leader. ''I told Nunn he'd have twominutes for his part,'' recalled Schneiders. ''He called back at the end of the day and said he couldn't do it. Two minutes was not enough time to address a complex issue like national defense, and we should get someone else to speak.'' His seriousness of purpose and mastery of detail have gained for Nunn great influence in the Senate. Last fall, when Congress was engulfed in the political frenzy over illegal drugs, the Senate took up a proposal to use military aircraft in the war on narcotics. Nunn rose to speak. ''To seal the borders to drug smugglers,'' he said quietly, ''will require 80 new military bases, 800 helicopters, 7,400 military police and three times the number of Awacs reconaissance planes currently flying. ''I can go on,'' continued Nunn, ''but it gets worse.'' His colleagues gave in - some of them even began to wave handkerchiefs in surrender. The measure was tabled.  He has also been a key figure in the debate over the MX missile. Although he has criticized the Administration's plan to base MX missiles in hardened Minuteman silos, Nunn has been a part of every major compromise that has kept the MX alive, and he was instrumental in getting the number of MX's reduced from 60 to 50. Nunn's seriousness about issues is matched by his near-legendary political caution. When fellow Georgian Jimmy Carter ran for President in 1976, Nunn withheld his endorsement until after the Pennsylvania primary, when Carter already had a lock on the nomination. And in 1984, Senator John Glenn of Ohio came to the South to make his last stand in the contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination. Glenn was running as a centrist, and he desperately sought Nunn's imprimatur. The two men appeared together at a rally, at which Nunn lavished praise on the former astronaut. But he withheld his endorsement, refusing, under prodding from reporters, even to say whom he planned to vote for in the Georgia primary. BUT NUNN APPEARS TO be taking the first halting steps toward political activism. President Reagan's landslide re-election victory over Walter F. Mondale in 1984 provided centrists with an opportunity to take charge of their party's political debate. Nunn has played a lead-ing role in that effort, helping in 1985 to establish the Democratic Leadership Council, a group that includes such other potential Presidential aspirants as Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt and former Governor Robb of Virginia. Nunn insists that the creation of the council was motivated less by ideology than by the need for the Democratic Party to come up with an agenda for winning the White House. ''Democrats have to show they can govern,'' he said. The council will demonstrate the party's ability by focusing on strategies for economic growth. ''Defense and foreign policy will be a measure of our competence,'' he said. ''But we will regain peoples' confidence by how we handle the economy.'' At the same time he is working to reshape his party from within, Nunn is also exerting his influence over the Reagan Administration, to the Democrats' advantage. Shortly after returning from his October summit meeting in Iceland with Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Reagan went on the road for Republican candidates, bashing the Democratic Party as a threat to his Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars, program, and demanding that Democrats declare where they stood on defending America. A Democratic strategist called Nunn and urged him to lead a counterattack. The Senator demurred. ''Nunn said it was too important an issue for Democrats to try to take political advantage of,'' the strategist recalled. But the next day, Nunn delivered a speech on the Senate floor that threw the President on the political defensive on arms control and sharpened the debate over the Reykjavik meeting with Gorbachev. He became the first member of Congress with substantial standing to question whether Reagan understood the implications of the proposals he put on the table in Iceland, particularly the offer to eliminate all strategic nuclear missiles and ballistic missiles from Europe. ''It is obvious that this proposal has not been thought through adequately,'' Nunn later told reporters. ''If a liberal Democrat had proposed such an agreement, the impeachment petitions would already be circulating.'' Nunn says that the impression of him as a reluctant partisan stems largely from hisrefusal to politicize national-security issues. ''I can't think of any major problem that can be solved with partisanship,'' he said. His break with the President on arms control, he says, was based on policy, not politics. The most significant change in Sam Nunn has been his willingness to campaign on behalf of fellow Democrats. One of those who benefited from his political coattails in 1986 was Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., a liberal from Atlanta, who defeated Senator Mack Mattingly, a Republican, at least partly on the strength of Nunn's endorsement and active campaigning. It was the first time Nunn, a man once known as Selfish Sam for his reluctance to involve himself in other campaigns, had put his prestige on the line for another Georgia Democrat. Nunn also campaigned actively on behalf of other Democratic candidates across the country, including the liberal California Senator Alan Cranston and Colorado Representative Timothy E. Wirth, who won Gary Hart's vacant Senate seat. Wirth credits Nunn with protecting him against his opponent's attempt to make Star Wars an issue in that race. Why has Nunn suddenly taken a role in national Democratic politics? ''People have said I did this because I was running for President,'' he said. ''The truth of it is, this is really the first time anybody invited me to their states to campaign.'' BUT NUNN'S INTEREST IN the Presidency has clearly motivated his shift away from caution. Nunn declared last summer that he would consider a Presidential race; at the time, his statement stirred little interest. But when the November elections were over and Democrats again controlled the Senate, Nunn was suddenly being taken seriously as a prospect for the White House. ''In voting for a President, people tend to react to the last President,'' said Hamilton Jordan, who served as President Jimmy Carter's chief of staff and main political strategist. ''After Ronald Reagan's 'chairman of the board' approach to the Presidency, I think the American people will hunger in 1988 for a hands-on chief executive with proven Federal experience and the ability to tackle the tough issues of arms control, budget and trade.'' Sam Nunn, predicts Jordan, ''will (Continued on Page 31) fit both the mood and the need of our country.'' Nunn, who has not formed a campaign committee, begun fund-raising efforts or sought expert advice for a Presidential run, has promised his supporters a decision by the end of this month on whether he will form a Presidential exploratory committee. ''A key question is whether I could make a greater contribution to Georgia and the nation as chairman of the Armed Services Committee or as President,'' he said. His admirers are telling him he is in the enviable position of having the Presidency seek him, and that 1988 is his year. Eight Southern states, including Georgia, are scheduled to hold primaries on March 8, and some political strategists say that if Nunn survives the New Hampshire primary, a Southern sweep could catapult him to the front of the pack. Some political professionals question whether Nunn would be able to recreate the coalition of Southern whites and blacks that came together behind Jimmy Carter's Presidential bid in 1976. Nunn, for instance, does not apologize for his early support for George Wallace. ''I frankly admired Wallace,'' he said, ''not because of his racial views, but because of his willingness to stand up and shake a fist at Washington occasionally. There's something therapeutic about that in the South.'' Moreover, one of the 1988 contestants is likely to be the Rev. Jesse Jackson, a sharp critic of the effort by Nunn and other Democrats to yank the party to the right. But there are indications that the growing political pragmatism of Southern blacks could work in Nunn's favor, even against the emotional appeal of a Jackson candidacy. Despite his 1972 embrace of Wallace, Nunn has been spared the taint of intransigence on civil rights that marked an earlier generation of Southern politicians. Although not a vocal opponentof segregation, Nunn, as a young lawyer in the 1960's, did help to organize a biracial committee to open lines of communication between blacks and whites in Perry, his hometown. Nunn has built a close political relationship with his state's black leaders, many of whom are trying to persuade the Senator to run for President. Among them are former Atlanta Mayor Maynard Jackson, who supported Jesse Jackson in 1984, and John Lewis, a veteran civil rights activist elected last November to Congress from Atlanta's Fifth District. ''Southern politicians have a way of growing and broadening themselves when they reach the national political scene,'' said Lewis. ''I think Sam Nunn is trying to broaden his concerns and base, and if he runs for President, I'll be out there working for him.'' FOR ALL THE PRESIDEN-tial talk, Sam Nunn embodies a political irony: few Democrats are more respected and at the same time seemingly more out of step with their party. Although he has criticized President Reagan severely on arms control, Nunn is one of his strongest supporters among Senate Democrats. According to Congressional Quarterly, in 1985 Nunn voted with the President on contested issues more than any other Democrat; and he tied Alabama's Senator Howell Heflin as the Democrat who voted conservative most often. On defense, Nunn opposed the effort of 49 of his Senate colleagues to cut $2 billion from Reagan's budget request for Star Wars, although he repeatedly criticized the President for trying to sell it as a ''population shield,'' a notion that the Senator says ''borders on the absurd.'' Nunn also continues to support Reagan's effort to aid Nicaraguan rebels, and was instrumental in forging Congressional approval last spring of the $100 million aid package to the contras. Even now, after the disclosure that profits from the secret arms sale to Iran had been diverted to the contras, Nunn has not shifted his position. ''Our strategic interest in Nicaragua hasn't changed,'' he explained. ''I hope we will find a way to debate the issue on its merits.'' Still, on the contra-aid issue he remains cautious, refusing to say whether he will take the lead on it in the Senate in 1987. ''It will depend on what the Administration does,'' he said. Some liberal Democrats contend that Nunn could quickly and dramatically broaden his political base by using his influence to oppose Reagan on these issues. Nunn dismisses the criticism. ''I've never dealt with national defense in a political way and I'm not about to start now,'' he said. ''My critics do me a favor by exaggerating my influence and then knocking me down for not exercising it.'' The fact that he is even answering his critics, rather than going quietly about the business of building influence, marks a change in Sam Nunn. But if he embarks on a national campaign, Nunn will be tested as he never has been before. Will he remain the reluctant politician, or will he aggressively seek the mantle of national leadership? ''If I decide to run,'' Sam Nunn said recently, ''there will be no question that I will have fire in the belly.''
