961|1987\01\04|Identified Flying Object|ARE YOU BORED WITH your usual wines? The same old Lafite, Echezeaux and Dom Perignon, week in, week out? Perhaps it's time for a little flying cigar.|ARE YOU BORED WITH your usual wines? The same old Lafite, Echezeaux and Dom Perignon, week in, week out? Perhaps it's time for a little flying cigar. ARE YOU BORED WITH your usual wines? The same old Lafite, Echezeaux and Dom Perignon, week in, week out? Perhaps it's time for a little flying cigar. Yes, flying cigar. It's a wine - but why hear it secondhand? Let Randall Grahm tell it: He's the chap who made the stuff, and what follows are the notes from the back label, which he wrote: ''In 1954, the village council of Chateauneuf-du-Pape was quite perturbed and apprehensive that flying saucers or 'flying cigars' might do damage to their vineyards, were they to land therein. So, right-thinking men all, they passed an ordinance prohibiting the landing of flying saucers or flying cigars in their vineyards. (This ordinance has worked well in discouraging such landings.) The ordinance further states that any flying saucers or flying cigars that did land were to be taken immediately to the pound.'' The French for flying cigar is cigare volante, and that's what Mr. Grahm calls his wine. A bit fey? Perhaps. But not entirely irrevelant. Chateauneuf-du-Pape is probably the best-known wine of France's Rhone Valley, and Mr. Grahm has sought to emulate it in his Cigare Volant. He is the owner and wine maker at Bonny Doon Vineyard in the Santa Cruz Mountains, south of San Francisco. Mr. Grahm, like many California winegrowers before him, discovered early on that the California wine country isn't really like Bordeaux. On a lot of summer days, even in the so-called cooler northern counties, the temperature is more reminiscent of El Alamein than St.-Emilion. What much of the California vineyard country resembles is the southern Rhone Valley. The Rhone River rises in the Alps and wanders more or less aimlessly through Switzerland and eastern France until it gets its act together east of Lyons, joins up with the Saone River and heads south 190 miles to the Mediterranean Sea. The northern Rhone region, from Lyons to Valence, is temperate, but from Montelimar to Avignon the country is meridional - hot and dusty, with red tile roofs everywhere. This is the country of Chateauneuf-du-Pape, of Cotes du Rhone and Gigondas, a land where the syrah grape is king and where a lot of Californian wine makers could feel at home. Particularly those who make petite sirah. Before Randall Grahm, dark, heavy petite sirah was California's most Rhone-like wine. Actually, the syrah and the petite sirah are not the same grape. The California petite sirah grape is known in the Rhone Valley as the durif. Cigare Volante is made from 72 percent grenache, 25 percent syrah and 3 percent mourvedre, the traditional melange used in Chateauneuf-du-Pape. Grenache, which shows up all around the Mediterranean basin, has been used in California for years, mostly in rose wines. Mourvedre, originally a Spanish grape, is grown in a few vineyards around Concord in Contra Costa County in California. Mr. Grahm first went to Santa Cruz to make pinot noir, the wine of Burgundy. His 48-acre property at Bonny Doon turned out to be too hot. Which didn't stop him from making pinot noir. He buys the grapes each year in Oregon. He makes Bordeaux-style claret and Burgundy-style chardonnay, but, more and more, he has moved to the Rhone-style wines. His young vineyards -planted in 1980 - contain plots of marsanne, roussanne and viognier, the grape of France's most exotic little wine region, Chateau Grillet. Marsanne is the grape of Hermitage white, and Mr. Grahm predicts that, 15 years from now, marsanne will be among the principal white wines of California. One of his favorite grapes is pinot blanc. Actually, it isn't pinot blanc at all, but melon, a popular grape in the Loire Valley. While his own vines are maturing, Mr. Grahm purchases most of his grapes. His syrah, for example, comes from French vines grown around Paso Robles, in central California. The Bonny Doon vineyards are as unusual as the wines they are beginning to produce. As in some regions of France, the vines are planted close together and not irrigated. ''The vines compete with each other,'' Mr. Grahm says. ''It forces them to produce their best. Typically, the best vineyards in Napa produce about six tons of grapes per acre; the best vineyards in Chateauneuf produce two. Is it any wonder that so many of our grapes, and therefore our wines, lack acid and flavor?'' Bonny Doon produced about 8,000 cases of wine in 1985, and may go to around 10,000 this year. Not very much. And since Mr. Grahm makes so many different kinds of wine, there are very few cases of any one type. The current list includes Cigare Volante; syrah; a red blend called Claret; a muscat canelli, a dessert wine made from grapes left out to dry before fermentation; a cabernet sauvignon made from grapes grown in Mendocino's Anderson Valley; a pinot blanc; a vin gris made from mourvedre, and a controversial high-acid chardonnay that last year sold out at the winery. Bonny Doon wines are distributed only in about 10 states, but several shops around New York stock a few cases when they can get them. Mr. Grahm, 33, is a city person -Los Angeles - who gave up philosophy for wine. ''Actually, I was supposed to become a doctor,'' he says. ''Instead, I became an alchemist, which is what a wine maker really is.'' He didn't give up philosophy completely. One of his 1985 efforts is a white table wine called Le Sophiste -Cuvee Philosophique. It's a blend of marsanne and roussanne. ''I really haven't thought out the name yet,'' says Mr. Grahm, the former philosphy student, ''except that a lot of thought went into making the wine.''  WINE
