962|1987\01\04|The Homecoming|RESTAURANTS THAT SERVE so-called back-to-basics fare - some call it mom-and-pop food - are proliferating, offering such specialties as chicken pot pie, corned beef and cabbage, pot roast with potato pancakes, braised short ribs of beef and meat loaf with mashed potatoes.|RESTAURANTS THAT SERVE so-called back-to-basics fare - some call it mom-and-pop food - are proliferating, offering such specialties as chicken pot pie, corned beef and cabbage, pot roast with potato pancakes, braised short ribs of beef and meat loaf with mashed potatoes. RESTAURANTS THAT SERVE so-called back-to-basics fare - some call it mom-and-pop food - are proliferating, offering such specialties as chicken pot pie, corned beef and cabbage, pot roast with potato pancakes, braised short ribs of beef and meat loaf with mashed potatoes. I do not consider this a retrogression in taste. To my mind, it signifies a healthy sophistication. We have adopted and learned to accept the kitchen cultures of many nations and regions, just as we have learned to accept and applaud American cooking with self-assurance. An interesting point is that today's young chefs are not only turning out these long-established staples, but are adding their own touches to them. During a recent visit to California, I was able to talk with two of the most widely acclaimed young chefs who offer their clients superlative food with a purely Yankee heritage. They are John E. Sola of the Grill, in Beverly Hills, and Leonard Schwartz of the 72 Market Street restaurant, in Venice, about a 35-minute drive from downtown Los Angeles. The dishes that chef Sola produced during my visit included a fabled chicken pot pie; chef Schwartz's offerings included an uncommonly well-seasoned black bean soup with a flavoring of ground cumin. These are dishes with well-established roots, but in these young men's hands, they are not at all like mother used to make. The pies were crowned with puff pastry that puffed and billowed and browned as they baked. The black bean soup was served with side dishes of sour cream and freshly made salsa, that great Tex-Mex specialty consisting of tomatoes, onions, jalapeno peppers and fresh coriander leaves. These are garnishes to be added to the soup according to taste. Jalapeno corn-bread muffins, another accompaniment, was made with corn and cheese. ''This return to the basics is, for most Americans, a question of sentiment and nostalgia,'' says Schwartz, who was born in the Bronx 38 years ago. ''But I, personally, look on it as an adventure. I can't cook without the desire to improve on the original, on what mother used to make. I think of the food of today's young chefs as 'reborn dishes.' I always want to sharpen flavors and texture with herbs and spices not known to earlier generations. I guess you'd call it bringing things up-to-date.'' Chef Sola, who was born in Boston 33 years ago and who moved to Southern California at the age of 3 months, believes this resurgence of home-style cooking reflects a desire on the part of the public to recapture the simpler values in life. ''People yearn for the good old flavors,'' he says. ''They like larger portions and they enjoy the simplicity of it all. They don't want fancy sauces to cover up natural flavors. We like to give customers anything they ask for, whether it's ground sirloin with mushroom sauce or braised short ribs. Ours is an operation with food that appeals to the whole family - mothers, fathers, the children, aunts and uncles.''  CHICKEN POT PIE  4 1/2 pounds chicken legs and thighs  3 pounds bony parts of chicken, such as the backs and necks  1 leek, about 3 ounces, trimmed and rinsed well  2 bay leaves  3 cups finely chopped onions  2 cups coarsely chopped celery  1 cup heavy cream  14 tablespoons butter  6 tablespoons flour 1/4 teaspoon bottled hot sauce  1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice Salt to taste, if desired 1/4 cup finely chopped shallots  2 cups diced carrots 3/4 pound fresh small mushrooms, cut into quarters, about 4 cups 1/2 pound fresh or frozen green peas, about 1Y cups  1 1/2 pounds puff pastry (see note)  3 eggs, beaten. 1. Put the chicken legs and thighs plus the bony parts of chicken in a kettle and add cold water to cover. Bring to the boil and let simmer about one minute. Drain. #2.Put 16 cups of water in a clean kettle and add the chicken pieces. Add the leek, bay leaves, two cups of the chopped onions and the celery. Cover and cook, skimming the surface often, to remove excess fat, foam and scum, about 15 minutes. #3.Using a pair of tongs, remove the legs and thighs from the kettle. Let cool. Meanwhile, let the stock with the necks and backs continue to cook, skimming the surface as necessary. #4.When the legs and thighs are cool enough to handle, remove and set aside the meat from the bones. Discard the skin. There should be about six cups of chicken meat. Toss the bones back into the kettle and cook one hour longer. #5.Strain the broth, discarding the solids. Put three cups of the broth into a saucepan, saving the remaining broth for other uses. Add the cream to the broth and bring to the boil. Cook 10 or 15 minutes or until reduced to three and one-half cups. #6.Meanwhile, slowly melt eight tablespoons of butter over gentle heat. Skim off the surface foam and carefully pour the clear center liquid into a cup. This is clarified butter. There should be about six tablespoons of the clarified butter. Pour this into a mixing bowl and add the flour. Stir to blend. Bring broth with the cream to the boil. Gradually add the blended flour and butter, stirring constantly with a wire whisk. Add the bottled hot sauce, lemon juice and salt to taste. Cook five minutes. #7.Heat the remaining six tablespoons of butter in a wide, heavy skillet and add the shallots. Cook briefly, stirring. Add the remaining cup of onions, the carrots and the mushrooms and cook three minutes, stirring. Add the six cups of chicken meat. Cook, stirring occasionally, about three minutes. #8.If fresh peas are used, drop them into boiling water and cook 30 seconds. Drain. If frozen peas are used, put them into a sieve and hold them under the hot water faucet about 15 seconds. Drain. Add the thickened sauce to the chicken and mushroom mixture. Stir in the peas. Blend thoroughly. #9.Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 350 degrees. #10.Ideally, you should use six oven-proof earthenware pot-pie dishes measuring about five and one-half inches in diameter. Spoon equal portions of the creamed chicken into the dishes, piling each portion up slightly. #11.Roll out the puff pastry on a lightly floured surface to an eighth-inch thickness. Using a round lid measuring about six and one-half inches in diameter, cut out six rounds to cover the tops of the pot-pie dishes. #12.Brush around the perimeter of each round of pastry with beaten egg to make a one-inch egg-brushed margin. Brush around the outside top of each pot-pie dish about one-inch deep with beaten egg. Invert one egg-brushed round of dough over each filled pot-pie dish. Let the dough drape down all around the sides of each dish. Press the edges of the pastry against the upper side of each dish to seal firmly. Brush the top and sides of the pastry covers with more egg. #13.Arrange the dishes on a baking sheet and place in the oven. Bake about 25 minutes or until the pastry topping is puffed and nicely browned. Yield:Six servings. Note:If you do not wish to make your own puff pastry, it may be purchased at Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas, and Grace's Marketplace, 1237 Third Avenue.  BLACK BEAN SOUP 1/2 pound smoked slab bacon with rind  1 1/2 cups finely chopped onions  1 1/2 cups finely chopped celery  1 1/2 cups finely diced carrots  1 bay leaf  1 tablespoon finely minced garlic  1 1/4 teaspoons dried thyme  4 tablespoons ground cumin  1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 1/4 cup finely chopped fresh oregano leaves or 1 tablespoon dried oregano, crumbled  3 tablespoons tomato paste  16 cups rich chicken broth, preferably homemade and concentrated, or canned broth may be substituted  1 pound black turtle beans or other black beans, about 3 cups  6 tablespoons freshly squeezed lime juice 1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper Salt to taste, if desired 1/2 cup finely chopped fresh coriander leaves Salsa for garnish (see recipe) Sour cream for garnish Jalapeno corn-bread muffins, optional (see recipe). 1.This soup is preferably made at least one day in advance. 2.Slice off and reserve the rind of the bacon. Cut the bacon into quarter-inch cubes. There should be about one and one-half cups. 3.Put the bacon cubes and the rind into a heavy kettle or casserole and cook, stirring often, until rendered of fat. When ready, the bacon cubes should be well-browned and crisp. 4.Add the onions, celery, carrots, bay leaf, garlic, thyme, three tablespoons of the cumin, black pepper and oregano. Stir to blend and cover the kettle or casserole closely. Cook about five minutes over moderately low heat. Do not allow the mixture to burn. 5. Add the tomato paste and stir briefly. Add the chicken broth and bring to the boil. 6. Rinse and drain the beans and add them to the soup. Cook, uncovered, over relatively high heat about two and one-half hours, skimming the surface occasionally to remove foam, scum and fat as it rises to the top. The soup is ready when the beans are soft and some of them have disintegrated because of the cooking heat and stirring. 7. Stir in the lime juice, cayenne pepper, salt, coriander leaves and remaining cumin. Remove and discard the bacon rind and bay leaf. 8. Ladle the soup into individual soup bowls. Serve the salsa and sour cream on the side, to be added at will. This soup is best served with jalapeno corn-bread muffins as an accompaniment.  Yield: Eight to 12 servings.  SALSA 1/2 cup finely chopped white or Spanish onions  2 cups unpeeled, unseeded, cored tomato cut into 1/4-inch cubes  1 1/2 teaspoons or more finely chopped fresh, seeded jalapeno peppers Salt to taste, if desired 1/4 cup finely chopped fresh coriander leaves  2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lime juice. Combine all the ingredients in a mixing bowl and blend well. Refrigerate until ready to serve.  Yield: About two and one-half cups.  MEAT LOAF  3 tablespoons butter 3/4 cup finely chopped onions 3/4 cup finely chopped green onions or scallions 1/2 cup finely chopped carrots 1/4 cup finely chopped celery 1/4 cup finely minced sweet red pepper 1/4 cup finely minced sweet green pepper  2 teaspoons finely minced garlic Salt to taste, if desired  1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 1/2 teaspoon white pepper  1 teaspoon ground cumin 1/2 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg  3 eggs, well beaten 1/2 cup bottled ketchup 1/2 cup half-and-half  2 pounds lean ground chuck 3/4 pound sausage in bulk (do not use fennel-flavored Italian sausage) 3/4 pound fine, fresh, toasted bread crumbs 1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees. 2. Heat the butter in a heavy kettle and add the onions, green onions or scallions, carrots, celery, red and green peppers and garlic. Cook, stirring often, about 10 minutes, or until all the moisture from the vegetables has evaporated. Let stand until cool. Refrigerate until chilled. 3. In a mixing bowl, combine the salt, black pepper, cayenne, white pepper, cumin, nutmeg and eggs. Beat well and add the ketchup and half-and-half. Blend thoroughly. 4. Add the chuck, sausage and bread crumbs. 5. Add the chilled ingredients and mix thoroughly with the hands. Knead for a considerable period of time. 6. Select a baking dish that will fit neatly and compactly inside a slightly larger baking dish. Pour boiling water into the larger pan and bring the water to the boil. 7. To shape the meat loaf, dampen the fingers and palms of the hands. Put the meat mixture into the smaller pan and shape it into an oval-shaped loaf resembling a long loaf of bread and measuring approximately 17 by 4 1/2 by 1 1/2 inches. 8. Set the smaller pan inside the larger pan over the boiling water. Place in the oven and bake 35 to 40 minutes. Remove from the water bath. Let the meat loaf rest outside the oven for 20 minutes before slicing and serving. Serve sliced.  Yield: Eight to twelve servings.  JALAPENO CORN-BREAD MUFFINS  1 cup sifted flour  1 cup cornmeal, preferably stone ground  1 tablespoon sifted baking powder  1 teaspoon dried hot red-pepper flakes 1/2 teaspoon salt, if desired  1 1/2 teaspoons ground cumin  2/3 cup sour cream  2/3 cup milk  2 tablespoons melted butter  1 large egg  1/3 cup finely diced hot chilies, preferably poblanos, available in markets that cater to a Spanish-speaking clientele, or use fresh or canned jalapenos  1/3 cup finely diced green onions or scallions  1/3 cup drained canned corn kernels  1 3/4 cups finely grated sharp Cheddar cheese Melted butter or liquid bacon fat for greasing muffin tins. 1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees. 2. In a mixing bowl, combine the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, pepper flakes, salt and cumin, and blend well. 3. In a separate mixing bowl, add the sour cream and milk, and blend well with a wire whisk. Beat in the melted butter and egg. 4. Add the liquid ingredients to the cornmeal mixture and blend well. Add the chilies, green onions, corn and cheese. Blend thoroughly. 5. Grease the inside of eight half-cup muffin tins. Spoon equal portions of the batter into each greased tin. The batter may be a bit higher than the top of the tins. 6. Place in the oven and bake 25 minutes. Ideally, these muffins are best eaten hot, fresh from the oven.  Yield: Eight muffins. FOOD
