963|1987\01\04|Set Free|AFTER MORE THAN 30 years as a confirmed, briefcase-carrying corporate workaholic, I have become, at 53, a pre-retired executive. I hadn't planned to turn in my|AFTER MORE THAN 30 years as a confirmed, briefcase-carrying corporate workaholic, I have become, at 53, a pre-retired executive. I hadn't planned to turn in my AFTER MORE THAN 30 years as a confirmed, briefcase-carrying corporate workaholic, I have become, at 53, a pre-retired executive. I hadn't planned to turn in my General Electric ID card that early, and I didn't do it willingly. My job was abolished, an increasingly commonplace occurrence today as chief executive officers seek profits by reducing overhead rather than by increasing sales. Given a choice of regular severance pay, a greatly reduced early-retirement package, or the option of staying unemployed and receiving half pay until I could retire at age 60, I chose the latter. How does a man in his prime, with a wife, three daughters and a granddaughter living at home walk away from the 8-to-5 world of executive privilege and take a 50 percent pay cut? Not easily and not without a lot of soul-searching, I assure you. The conventional wisdom is that a displaced executive must, as quickly as possible, find a comparable job. Better still, he should start his own company, so he can trumpet to the world that he's now making more money than he ever did working for the corporation. Our society glorifies men who cling relentlessly to a career until 65 or 70, especially if, in the process, they create a dragon's hoard of wealth. No matter that it is never to be enjoyed but only passed on to misunderstood children, unknown relatives and the I.R.S. After 25 or 30 years, work becomes an addiction like cigarette smoking, and one that is equally hard to break. Most American men have by now forgotten the reason they chose their line of work in the first place, and they continue at the job long after it is no longer needed and provides no satisfaction. It took me many introspective weeks to remember that when I first took a corporation job I vowed to make enough money so that I could stop when relatively young and still healthy. Then I would have the time and freedom to do what I wanted. Initially, when I got word that I and my staff were goners, I was devastated. I never conceived that a highly respected institution like the General Electric News Bureau, where I was manager of the high-tech unit, could be dispensed with so casually. We specialized in executive articles, speeches and technical stories on hot topics, such as lasers, robots and medical scanners. Even as I had watched individuals and entire organizations fall victim to the G.E. philosophy that ''less is more,'' I foolishly rationalized that it couldn't happen to us. I think what frosted me most was that I had put in 30 years, 5 months and 25 days of continuous service to get to the point that I had 6 weeks' vacation and, finally, the income to be able to take advantage of it. Now I was seemingly back to square one - not because of poor per-formance, but because an unnamed ''they'' were filling a quota from the C.E.O. Finding another job is not easy when you are past 50 and dead set against commuting to New York City. But I found one. It would have required moving from Connecticut to New Jersey. We had always been gypsies with G.E., but I couldn't see packing up the family now. I turned the job down. I explored setting up a public relations firm with two of my staff. I looked at overpriced office space, talked to enthusiastic, but poor, prospective clients and had meetings with advertising agencies looking for a back-scratching relationship. I didn't like the numbers. I rebelled at the thought of the long hours it would take to make a go of it. And my heart wasn't in it; I couldn't see myself spending another 10 years as a flack, making silk purses from sows' ears. If I knew what I didn't want to do, did I know what I really wanted? Yes, that was easy. I wanted to write. As a college senior, I had dreamed of working for The New Yorker. Marriage, G.E., the Army and children all deflected me from that dream. But the idea of being a ''real'' writer - not just a corporate ''ghost'' - had rarely been out of my thoughts. I wanted to do what was right for my family, but also what was right for me. Wasn't this a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to try for the dream? Despite the blow to my executive pride, I was far more fortunate than most men who are laid off. G.E.'s half pay would be free of deductions, except for Federal income tax, and it could be supplemented by taking the dividends on our modest portfolio of stocks and bonds in cash instead of reinvesting them. Then, too, my wife was expanding her hobby of cake baking and decorating, and that would help. Even if I never wrote the Great American Novel, I thought we could manage. I told my worried mother what I figured my new take-home pay would be. She said, ''Well, if you can't live on that, you should be spanked.'' A week before Christmas, two weeks before my final termination, I made up my mind to exit the rat race. I told my family that we'd have to scale back our free-spending style, but that no one was going to have to forgo college or even cable television. My wife was delighted at the prospect of having me around the house, although she pointedly reminded me that marriage was ''for better or worse, but not for lunch.'' The kids simply assumed I had the finances worked out. My earthshaking decision was a ho-hummer. After 10 months, it seems to be working. I've finished 24 chapters of a book, and for the first time in my adult life I'm able, pretty much, to do all the things I've always wanted to do but never had the time for. Like taking my wife out for breakfast. Reading books I bought 10 years ago. Painting the house. Gardening. Fishing. Dreaming. And we're still solvent. I've found that double coupons can cut the grocery bill 25 percent. I haunt tag sales and factory outlets for bargains. Because dentists are no longer covered, we go less frequently and brush more. Travel is planned well in advance, to take advantage of $59 hotel rooms and $99 air fares. And we subscribe to half as many magazines these days. Now that I've had a taste of early retirement, I'm able to appreciate the concept that less can indeed be more. And I'm beginning to believe that being forced out of the corporate groove may be, next to my marriage, the best thing that ever happened to me. ABOUT MEN
