964|1987\01\04|Lugging It In Luxury|IN ''THE GOOD SOLDIER,'' FORD MADOX Ford describes the travel gear of his fastidious title character with discernible envy. ''It must have taken a whole herd of the Gadarene swine to make up his outfit,'' he says of the lot - a majestic assortment of pigskin shirt cases, collar cases and multifarious containers housing medicine, firearms, hats and helmets.|IN ''THE GOOD SOLDIER,'' FORD MADOX Ford describes the travel gear of his fastidious title character with discernible envy. ''It must have taken a whole herd of the Gadarene swine to make up his outfit,'' he says of the lot - a majestic assortment of pigskin shirt cases, collar cases and multifarious containers housing medicine, firearms, hats and helmets. IN ''THE GOOD SOLDIER,'' FORD MADOX Ford describes the travel gear of his fastidious title character with discernible envy. ''It must have taken a whole herd of the Gadarene swine to make up his outfit,'' he says of the lot - a majestic assortment of pigskin shirt cases, collar cases and multifarious containers housing medicine, firearms, hats and helmets. Edward Ashburnham's luggage might be the envy of some men even now. For though most travelers these days tend to go light, making do with little more than a sturdy, hanging garment bag and carry-on piece, experts point to a rekindled interest in the kind of luxurious, well-crafted baggage the major owned. Long-wearing, substantial pullmans and other rigidly constructed bags hold decided appeal for rising young professionals, the so-called yuppies, and older ones too, says Robert K. Ermatinger, executive vice president of the Luggage and Leather Goods Manufacturers of America. ''The yuppies have become muppies,'' he says. ''As they approach middle age, they are becoming more conservative.'' Instead of soft, pliable satchels, many are choosing hard-framed, and sometimes hard-sided, cases. ''No more rolling up clothes in a duffle bag,'' Mr. Ermatinger says. ''People are buying their luggage for longer-term value.'' Luggage retailers and merchants agree that the so-called muppies are a market to reckon with. Though no one is predicting a return to the fortresslike steamer truck, a hard-walled miniature closet replete with drawers and hangers, most report increased sales of old-fashioned leather or fabric bags. Although soft nylon or canvas bags constitute about half his sales, Julius Wein, president of Crouch & Fitzgerald, the New York luggage shop, says constructed leather pieces are noticeably more popular than a year ago. Many of his clients still resist buying leather, believing it to be heavy and unwieldy, but others are discovering its practicality. As Mr. Ermatinger says, ''Leather has to be practical. It's cowhide, you know, and cows run around bumping up against barbed wire.'' Barneys New York and Givenchy Gentleman in Manhattan also report an intensified demand for rigid-framed leather cases. ''People want leather luggage again,'' says Givenchy's manager, Ed Newell, ''just as they want other luxury items.'' Both stores also do a vigorous business in a new category, the leather weekend attache case. Fitted with separate storage for shirts and toiletries, it is useful to ''the sort of man who goes to Europe for the weekend,'' says Barneys' president, Fred Pressman. Those who prefer a more malleable bag can choose from a widening selection of lightweight leathers by makers such as Tumi or Cassegrain Longchamps. Most experts suggest that a bag of fabric or leather be resilient enough to withstand some rough handling. The frame may be relatively rigid - hardwood is most pliant, yielding under stress - but the sides ought to remain flexible and, ideally, padded, for an extra measure of protection. The leather handle should penetrate the bag; rivets, hinges, locks and other fittings should be brass, which tends to resist corrosion. A meticulously constructed bag should also have mitred corners, so that its covering will fit tautly, says Geoffrey A. Krolle, head of Tanner-Krolle, the London luggage maker. He adds that a high-quality leather bag will have hand-sewn corners and edges, and a top-grain cowhide surface with its natural markings intact. At about $800, a 30-inch Tanner-Krolle pullman incorporating such features is costly, Mr. Krolle concedes, but some people find it worth the price. ''It is like a Savile Row suit that is made by hand,'' he says. ''You cannot mass produce it. If you could, it would be made in Hong Kong.''  MEN'S STYLE
