966|1987\01\04|Harrods Expansion, Canadian Recreation|Heading Abroad From Knightsbridge|Heading Abroad From Knightsbridge Heading Abroad From Knightsbridge Mention Harrods and the mind's eye swiftly calls up an image of the huge department store in the Knightsbridge section of London. Well, from now on, mention of Harrods must allow for a vision, too, of a little bit of Germany. Harrods Ltd. has opened its first airport shop in a new shopping mall at the Frankfurt Airport in West Germany. The venture is the first Harrods shop in Germany and the store's first airport outlet. Another Harrods, in Madrid, is scheduled to open later this month. Half of the store's 3,100 square feet is devoted to the Harrods line of food products and German produce, and a buffet offers visitors an opportunity to dine on the various delicacies (smoked salmon among them) offered for sale, accompanied by wines or Champagne by the glass. The shop also features British men's and women's wear and a selection of accessories, small leather goods, stationery, jewelry and watches. The new store is open from 8 A.M. to 9 P.M. daily. More information is available from Harrods (Knightsbridge, London SW1 7XL, England; 730-1234, extension 3637). Golf, Hiking And Rafting in Canada's West  By helicopter and raft - and doubtless by more genteel vehicles such as golf carts - a 13-day tour will proceed into western Canada next summer to take in fairway and green as well as spectacular scenery and bronc busters. The medium for all this is the Rocky Mountain Golf and Heli-Hiking Holiday from July 8 to 21, featuring a warmup round at the Willow Park Golf Club in Calgary, play on two new Robert Trent Jones courses nestled between snow-capped mountains in the heart of an Alberta Indian reservation in a region called Kananaskis Country and a final two rounds at Banff Springs and Jasper. Rounding out all this will be a visit to a Wild West show during the Calgary Stampede, a raft trip up the Bow River and - for the finale - two days of heli-hiking (hikers are dropped into mountain valleys by helicopter at various times of the day) in the Cariboo Range of the Canadian Rockies. Participants will stay in the Lodge at Kananaskis about 45 miles west of Calgary (opening in June as the latest in the Canadian Pacific Railroad's array of luxury resort hotels), at the Banff Springs Hotel and Jasper Park Lodge and at a private ski lodge in the Cariboo Range, where a final golfers' awards party will conclude the festivities. Based on double occupancy, the tour is priced at $2,720 a person, including accommodations, most breakfasts and dinners and some lunches, cocktail parties, helicopter and raft trips, a night at the Calgary Stampede, greens fees and prizes and transfers. Golf carts and dinners during two nights in Calgary are not included nor is air fare to Calgary for the start of the tour. From New York, the estimated round-trip fare is $569. For details contact June Breton, Ridgewater Partners (116 Clapboard Ridge Road, Greenwich, Conn. 06830; 203-869-5164). In France, It's Coffee and Quilt  In the United States, the term is bed and breakfast. In France, it's cafe-couette, which translates literally as coffee and quilt. And now, more than 1,500 rooms throughout France, including about 250 in Paris, are available through the program, operated by an association of homeowners who rent their lodgings. Based on double occupancy, prices range from $19.50 to $39 a person; single occupancy rates begin at $26 a night. In most cases a minimum stay of three nights is required. The least expensive rooms, bearing the association's three-coffeepot rating, are comfortable, private and offer the hospitality of French hosts who know their regions intimately. The most expensive, with designations up to six coffeepots, are luxurious -perhaps in a villa with private pool or in a chalet near a ski slope. Many rooms are in private chateaus. All rates include Continental breakfast. In the United States, the tour operator known as the French Experience can book cafe-couette accommodations or design an itinerary around the lodgings. In addition, the company arranges bookings in country homes, known as gites, as well as other rentals and tours. (A catalogue listing 500 gites may be obtained for $5). More information may be obtained from the French Experience (171 Madison Avenue, Suite 1505, New York, N.Y. 10016; 212-683-2445). Studying Digs While at Sea  Definitely off the beaten track is the biblical archeology seminar scheduled for Feb. 1 to 8. Although the subject is the latest digs in the Middle East and their impact on modern understanding of the biblical patriarchs, the Israelite exodus, religion in ancient Israel and the origins of Christianity, the setting is a luxury liner cruising the Caribbean. And the journey - setting out from Miami and calling at Cancun and Cozumel in Mexico and at Grand Cayman Island and the Norwegian Cruise Line's own island in the Caribbean before returning to Miami - offers an opportunity for optional trips ashore to explore Mayan ruins at Chichen Itza, Tulum and Coba on the Yucatan Peninsula. Leading the seminar on the Skyward will be Kyle McCarter, the William F. Albright Professor of Ancient Near Eastern and Biblical Studies at Johns Hopkins University, who will also explain how archeologists dig and how they interpret the artifacts they discover. The seminar is sponsored by the Biblical Archaeology Society. Based on double occupancy and depending on the choice of shipboard accommodations, the cruise ranges in price from $1,395 to $1,605 a person. The fare includes seminars and lectures and air transportation to and from Miami. The Biblical Archaeology Society is planning a similar cruise through Alaska's Inside Passage from June 14 to 25. The lecturer will be Yigal Shiloh, the excavation director at the City of David in Jerusalem. More information may be obtained from Janice Krause, Travel/Study Manager, Biblical Archaeology Society (3000 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 300, Washington, D.C. 20008; 202-387-8888). Indian Market In Colorado  In the middle of January more than 400 American Indian artists representing 90 tribal nations of the Americas are scheduled to gather at Currigan Exhibition Hall in downtown Denver for a three-day event: the Colorado Indian Market. The exhibition, demonstration and sale of art - jewelry, painting, Navajo rugs, kachina dolls, knives and warclubs, fetishes, South American pottery and weaving, masks, bead- and quillwork, clothing and the like - will be accompanied by continuous performances of traditional dancing and music. American Indian food will also be available. The Colorado Indian Market, scheduled for 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. on Jan. 16, 17 and 18, comes at a time of year that coincides with the ski season in Colorado and with the National Western Stock Show and Rodeo, the huge livestock show that has been a January fixture since 1906. Admission to the Colorado Indian Market will be $4, $2 for those under 12 and over 65, except on Friday, Jan. 16, when the fees will be $2 and $1, respectively. More information is available from the Colorado Indian Market (Post Office Box 13006, Boulder, Colo. 80308; 303-447-9967). Festival Time: Vermont's Way With Winter  For devotees of winter activities like sled dog competitions, broom hockey and a triathlon of cross-country skiing, skating and snoeshoeing, things are heating up. These events as well as snow golf, skating parties and fireworks are planned at the Newport Winterfest on Jan. 30 and 31 and Feb. 1, 7 and 8. But such Vermont festivities are not confined to Newport. Brookfield will hold a three-day Winter Ice Festival, Jan. 30 to Feb. 1, with ice harvesting, dog team demonstrations, family cross-country ski racing and areas for sledding and sleigh rides. The winter schedule in Vermont also includes telemark skiing festivals, ice fishing derbies, junior ski jumping championships, antiques shows, maple festivals and the United States Open Snowboarding Championships, March 6 to 8, in Stratton. Free Vermont winter information is available from the Vermont Travel Division (Department R722, 134 State Street, Montpelier, Vt. 05602; 802-828-3236). TRAVEL ADVISORY
