967|1987\01\04|PRACTICAL TRAVELER: FINDING OUT WHETHER THE TRIP IS A BARGAIN|There is considerable pressure these days to get people to travel on an impulse, or at least to commit themselves to future travel by paying a nonrefundable fee at once. The offerings take various forms, and all should get close scrutiny to be sure they suit you.|There is considerable pressure these days to get people to travel on an impulse, or at least to commit themselves to future travel by paying a nonrefundable fee at once. The offerings take various forms, and all should get close scrutiny to be sure they suit you. There is considerable pressure these days to get people to travel on an impulse, or at least to commit themselves to future travel by paying a nonrefundable fee at once. The offerings take various forms, and all should get close scrutiny to be sure they suit you. One such offering, in fact, is called Impulse. It is a gold plastic card, offered for $49.95 for the first year, that promises the holder 50 percent off the regular advertised room rate at more than 400 hotels and resorts in the United States, Mexico, the Bahamas and the Caribbean. It also offers discounts on some Hertz automobile rentals and Cunard cruises. If you book your air transportation through Cashback Travel, a Denver-based travel agency that has a joint marketing program with Impulse, you get up to a 5 percent rebate, depending on the cost of your flights. The heart of the Impulse offering is its hotel plan, which embraces such This is the second of two columns on cut-rate travel deals. places as the Copley Plaza Hotel in Boston, the Snowmass Club in Colorado and many Marriott hotels. Your reservations must be made through Impulse and within 14 days of check-in - which means you cannot plan very far ahead. You can stay any number of days, however, and any days of the week, and the company says that once a reservation is made, it is guaranteed. But at popular hotels, especially those that cater to large groups and conventions, don't expect rooms to be available on short notice in high season. On the other hand, when business is slack, many hotels offer the general public sharply reduced rates over weekends and sometimes in midweek, too - rates that cannot be further discounted through Impulse. Despite such caveats Impulse can still be a good deal if you are flexible, because sometimes hotels do develop hard-to-fill vacancies on short notice. Your Impulse discount on one night could easily cover the $49.95 you paid as dues (which the company says are normally $75). Impulse is a program of Access International, 6143 South Willow Drive, Suite 106, Englewood, Colo. 80111 (800-251-8853, except 303-740-8700 in Colorado). Cashback Travel is at 342 Madison Avenue, Suite 400, New York, N.Y. 10173 (212-490-0080) and at 1780 South Bellaire Street, Suite 130, Denver, Colo. 80222 (303-757-1000). It can be reached nationwide at 800-458-2274. Solicitation by TelephoneAnother type of impulse marketing caught the attention of Jean Martinetti, a legal secretary from Flemington, N.J. Last September, she said, she was solicited by telephone by Resort Telemarketing of Texas, Inc., based in Houston, and agreed that her MasterCard account be debited for $289 for a ''vacation passport voucher'' that supposedly entitled her to an array of travel bargains. Soon, she said, she received the voucher - No. 116602, issued by the Amy Travel Service of Naperville, Ill. - in a mailing dated Sept. 22 that detailed the terms of the purchase. It said it entitled her to buy two round-trip air tickets to a destination such as Acapulco, Jamaica, Hawaii, Las Vegas or London, plus lodging for seven nights, ''for the cost not to exceed that of one round-trip standard, all year, full economy (Y-class) air fare.'' Following instructions, Mrs. Martinetti said in a telephone interview in mid-December, she mailed her voucher on Oct. 27 to Amy Travel, requesting that she fly from Newark to London on Jan. 16, 23 or 30 for a week's vacation there. She was to have received an acknowledgement within seven business days, but she said she had heard nothing further and was trying to get a refund of the $289 on the ground that the offer had not been fulfilled. The $289, according to the voucher Mrs. Martinetti received, is nonrefundable. The mailing said the $289 merely entitled her to buy a vacation package but would not be applied toward its cost. In her case, the cost itself could be as much as $1,462, or the price of a full-fare economy round trip between New York and London on a major airline. Under current promotional offerings of British Airways, however, she and a companion could buy a similar package for $1,496, without having to pay $289 for the privilege. Amy Travel guarantees to pay triple the difference in cash ''if you can find the same lodging as we offer and the same air fares for a lesser amount,'' but that does not include the cost of the voucher. In an interview on Dec. 23, after I had asked Amy employees several times about Mrs. Martinetti, she said the agency had just telephoned her to say her reservations were ready. ''I said 'Forget it, I can't leave on such short notice,' '' Mrs. Martinetti said later. Debbie Frey, an assistant manager at Amy Travel, said failure to contact Mrs. Martinetti sooner must have been an unintentional slipup. William E. Jackman, a spokesman for the Airlines Reporting Corporation, an industry group that regulates the sale of air tickets through travel agencies, said Amy ''is O.K. with us.'' A November report on Amy by the Better Business Bureau of Chicago and Northern Illinois said it had received complaints of improper handling of travel arrangements and misrepresentation of costs. Asked about this, James Weiland, president of Amy, said, ''We've got thousands of happy clients'' but that ''when you sell over the phone you've always got somebody who thinks they're getting something free and doesn't understand the offer.'' Offers by PostcardAccording to Eunice Baros, an assistant attorney general in Florida, her office in Miami has taken action in about 50 cases involving postcards and other mailings sent all over the country that seem to offer free or exceptionally low-cost vacations in her state and elsewhere. ''Great News!'' one such postcard was headlined. ''You have been approved to receive a fabulous Florida vacation offer! You may choose from a variety of exciting BEACH RESORT AREAS . . . PLUS this vacation includes ORLANDO - home of DISNEY WORLD, EPCOT, AND SEAWORLD. You may vacation between now and Dec. 15, 1987, but you MUST CALL IMMEDIATELY to claim your vacation.'' Responding to one such postcard sent to my home in Pennsylvania, I was told that two nights in the Orlando area and two contiguous nights elsewhere in Florida for two people between 25 and 62 years old traveling together were mine free for a one-time service fee of $89.95, to be charged to a major credit card. As a bonus, I was offered a separate four-night vacation for two in Mexico. Air fare and meals were not included. When I vacillated on the telephone, I was offered the Florida accommodations alone for $59.95 if I responded at once. I declined and was told that the offer would not be repeated. Mrs. Baros and Dorothy Carroll, an analyst for the Florida Division of Consumer Services in Tallahassee, said such offers followed a familiar pattern. ''You pay your money up front,'' Mrs. Carroll said, ''and they say they need 30 to 60 days' advance notice to get you a reservation. Often when you have reserved, they call and ask you to postpone it. They really wear the people down by not giving them what they want. Then the company goes out of business and walks away with the money or offers them something far inferior to what they expected.'' Consumer-affairs specialists strongly advise that you never give a credit card number in response to a telephone offering until you are sure that the company is legitimate; if in doubt, check with the Better Business Bureau in the town nearest the company's headquarters. Using the words ''chosen'' or ''selected'' on a postcard does not mean you have won anything, merely that you have been selected to receive an offer. Read all the rules of any agreement carefully; determine all the costs involved. And before leaving home, telephone the hotel or resort directly to confirm that you have a paid reservation. A brochure entitled ''Have You Won a Vacation?'' is available if you send 25 cents plus a self-addressed long envelope with a 22-cent stamp to the Council of Better Business Bureaus, 1515 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Va. 22209. Consumers with complaints about offerings in Florida should send documented letters to Eunice Baros, Assistant Attorney General, 401 Northwest Second Avenue, Room 460, Miami, Fla. 33128.
