969|1987\01\04|FRENCH COOKING BY THE BOOKS|Paris offers sublime dining, the finest ingredients at shops and markets, and bookshops selling cookbooks that can turn the latter into the former.|Paris offers sublime dining, the finest ingredients at shops and markets, and bookshops selling cookbooks that can turn the latter into the former. Paris offers sublime dining, the finest ingredients at shops and markets, and bookshops selling cookbooks that can turn the latter into the former. The newest of these is the bright, inviting Librairie Gourmande near the Place St.-Michel on the Left Bank. A tantalizing aroma of a savory stew drifts to the door, making food lovers feel at home right away. Genevieve Baudon has lunch for herself and her husband, Marcel, simmering on the stove downstairs. It's chicken. ''I'm crazy about food,'' she explains, giving her own well-rounded cheek a pinch. ''That's why I started collecting cookbooks.'' The greatest chefs of France have been writing cookbooks for centuries (in French, of course), and the collection, begun 30 years ago, eventually took over two rooms in the Baudons' apartment, so she decided to start selling them at her husband's stall on the Quai Demontebello. Her husband, a bouquiniste, sells new and used books on an assortment of subjects on the quai. Last year she opened the shop. Her own collection is the basis for the 6,000 or so volumes in the inventory. ''The first time I sold one of my books,'' she said, ''I was afraid I would have pangs of regret, but I didn't because it was bringing such pleasure to the person who bought it. For them, buying a cookbook is not like buying a novel. They have a friend, a companion in the kitchen.'' The majority of the books in the shop are in French. ''I often get inquiries for books on French cooking in English,'' she said, ''but most of what I have in English is on British or American food.'' Mrs. Boudon herself speaks very little English. The books in the shop are organized by topic, with sections on provincial cooking, cooking of various countries, pastry making, cheeses, vegetarian food, wines and table decorations. One section is devoted to books published from 1900 to 1960, after which there was boom in the cookbook business and a proliferation of titles. New releases and best sellers are displayed on a table in the center. Behind Mrs. Baudon's cluttered desk is a glass case with rare volumes. ''Le Cuisinier Francais'' by La Varenne, is priced at $930. It was published in 1689; its fragile pages are bound in mottled tooled leather. A new acquisition, not yet priced, is a two-volume edition of ''Le Nouveau Cuisinier Royal et Bourgeois'' by Vincent de la Chapelle written in 1734. A copy of Marin's ''Dons de Comus'' published in 1739, is in mint condition and priced at $1,400. Posters large and small, many of them from the 1930's advertising aperitifs, others of botanical charts showing varieties of mushrooms or fruits, are some of the other food-related items carried in the book-filled shop. Some of the posters are on display in the large picture window that fronts the street. Prices start at about $8. A few antique molds in pottery and metal hang on the wall near the glass door and are also for sale. On a table by the window is a group of cookbooks for children, including one by Paul Bocuse, ''La Journee du Cuisinier'' (Etudes Vivantes), for about $13. Mrs. Baudon said her customers are either professional collectors seeking rare books - and from whom she sometime buys books as well - or people looking for particular cookbooks, mostly the newer ones. Right now books by chefs are in big demand. She has trouble keeping ''La Nouvelle Cuisine Classique'' by the Roux Brothers in stock. (This book, originally published in England, is available in an American edition called ''The New Classic Cuisine'' published by Barron's in 1984). Some of the other popular current titles are: ''Ma Cuisine Pour Vous'' by Joel Robuchon (Laffont), ''Le Grand Livre de la Cuisine a la Vapeur'' by Jacques Manire (De Noel), ''La Passion de Chocolat'' by the famous chocolatier from Lyons, Jean Bernachon (Flammarion) and ''Toute Cuisine de la Mer'' by the chefs of Le Duc restaurant in Paris (Olivier Orban). Most of these books cost $20 to $30. Mrs. Baudon said there had been some demand for ''Dining in France'' based on the series aired recently on American public television. Escoffier's ''Guide Culinaire'' (Flammarion) is a favorite. A series by Yves Thuries is beautifully done and, as of now, consists of seven volumes. Each book covers a different topic -among them are fish pates and terrines -and can be purchased individually or as a set. The lavishly illustrated leather-bound books are $132 each. The ''Almanach Historique de la Gastronomie Francaise'' by Christian Guy (Hachette) includes such details as drunken revolutionaries noted on June 25, 1793, by the American ambassador to Paris, and a letter written by Voltaire on March 12, 1734, in which he confesses to a friend that his stomach can't take ''la nouvelle cuisine.'' Some of her clients are the great chefs of France. Pierre Troisgros is ''interested in books with exotic recipes, foreign foods, Japanese,'' Mrs. Baudon said, ''not old collectors' items.'' Jean-Paul Lacombe of Leon de Lyon and Jacques Maniere also stop by. Sometimes chefs have books from their own collections to sell. Mrs. Baudon has purchased volumes offered by Henri Faugeron of Faugeron in Paris and Marc Meneau of L'Esperance in St. Pere-sous-Vezelay. Mrs. Baudon said she has seen a shift in taste recently. ''Young people seem to be more interested in good home cooking, and traditional bourgeois recipes adapted for modern kitchens. They like a full plate,'' she added, ''but for me, I still enjoy nouvelle cuisine because it gives me the chance to sample a variety of tastes.'' Mrs. Baudon will search for out-of-print books or others that she may not carry. She will also mail books to customers. But nothing gives her more pleasure than talking about food with those who enjoy it as much as she does, pulling books off the shelves and browsing through menus and recipes. Weights, measures and volumes Measurements in French cookbooks are usually given in metric weights and volumes rather than in cups and ounces, and temperatures are indicated in Centigrade. Also, in some cookbooks, especially older ones, tableware such as coffee spoons and wineglasses may be used for measuring instead of calibrated measuring utensils. A working knowledge of French is necessary for using the French recipes. La Librairie Gourmande, 4 Rue Dante, Paris 75005, (telephone 43.54.37.37) is open Monday through Saturday 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., Sunday noon to 7 P.M. Other Cookbook Specialists  Au Bain Marie, 2 Rue du Mail, Paris 75002 (42.60.94.55). Le Verre et l'Assiette, 1 Rue du Val-de-Grace, Paris 75005 (46.33.45.96). Edgar Soete, 5 Quai Voltaire, Paris 75007 (42.60.72.41).F. F. SHOPPER'S WORLD
