970|1987\01\04|SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA IDYLL|Laguna Beach, about halfway down the coast between Los Angeles and San Diego isn't merely what it is - a gorgeous, overly built, urgently touristed, maddeningly trafficked, adorable beach paradise with perfect weather and old-fashioned crystal-clear air. It's a symbol, much as Malibu has become a symbol, of certain California styles and archetypes.|Laguna Beach, about halfway down the coast between Los Angeles and San Diego isn't merely what it is - a gorgeous, overly built, urgently touristed, maddeningly trafficked, adorable beach paradise with perfect weather and old-fashioned crystal-clear air. It's a symbol, much as Malibu has become a symbol, of certain California styles and archetypes. Laguna Beach, about halfway down the coast between Los Angeles and San Diego isn't merely what it is - a gorgeous, overly built, urgently touristed, maddeningly trafficked, adorable beach paradise with perfect weather and old-fashioned crystal-clear air. It's a symbol, much as Malibu has become a symbol, of certain California styles and archetypes. When foreigners from, say, San Francisco, or the East Coast, visit Laguna they murmur, ''Oh, this is soooo Southern California,'' several times a day, having validated all their mythology of laconic, ''heeey, no problem,'' chronically tanned existence -life lived as a ripe avocado. Laguna Beach is the ultimate small-town escape - where people move when stressed to the max by the medium-fast lane of once-drowsy San Diego. Or when the demands of the L.A. scene are about to catapult them over the edge. The irony herein is that most of America believes this portion of the planet to be one long nap altogether. Laguna Beach is the major manifestation, by my totally informal and uncertifiable survey, of America's most noteworthy population of sun-bleached, perfectly sculptured and browned male bodies of varying ages who pass their summers, springs, winters and falls perched alone on cumbersome slats in the middle of the Pacific, staring hypnotically at waves until they eventually catch a quick jolt of a ride. And, equivalently, poised with infinite patience on the sand, is a cast of thousands of bikinied lasses with sun-streaked hair and flawless teeth, downing dozens of Cokes and thousands of tortilla chips, their blue eyes fastened on their lads out at sea, like fishermen's wives of old whose lot in life was waiting, waiting. The ocean and the beach form the essence, the matrix of Laguna life. Weekends are crowded year round, as the weather falls consistently in that narrow range of divine - 85 in the summer, 70 in the winter. It's a classic beach weekend, with all the pleasures of water sporting and beach vegetating. There are heart-stopping sunsets to be viewed with drink in hand from a variety of terrace bars. There are bed and breakfasts, motels and one utterly extraordinary hotel - the Ritz-Carlton - which is the main reason, in my view, to travel to Laguna. There are several quite good restaurants and the very best Chinese restaurant I've come upon in California, or perhaps in America. Lots of shops. Hundreds of shops. There is an extensive artists community in Laguna that produces some fine crafts, furniture, jewelry and the usual scattering of oil paintings of palm trees. Browsing through the galleries and studios is part of any Laguna sojourn. Weavers, candlemakers, potters, glass blowers and silversmiths have found homes and display spaces in this little town. And there seems to be some sort of arts festival happening throughout the summer. Strolling the narrow streets is the way to discover what is there. There are so many shops in Laguna that one can simply meander the streets for hours. Shebue on Pacific Coast Highway sells lovely handprinted silk fabrics, suedes and knits; State of the Arts on Glenneyre Street has unusual modern jewelry. Try the Bluebird Center across from the Surf and Sand for a bunch of stores, Forest Avenue for the best boutiques and locally designed jewelry and the Pottery Shack for an endless array of dishes and kitchenware sold at discount and glass-blowing demonstrations. There is no night life to speak of in Laguna, but a couple of movie theaters and an ear-splitting disco or two for the surfing gods and goddesses. If you must, visit the White House, but armed with earplugs. Laguna is actually tiny, five square miles, with only three and a half miles of coastline. Steep hillsides and green sloping canyons border the inland side of the Pacific Coast Highway, the main route that bisects Laguna as it winds its way circuitously up and down the entire California coastline. In the early 1900's the town was begun as a colony for artists, sculptors and craftsmen, but its population - even among the explosion of Orange County growth - has remained at only 19,000. New building is not encouraged by the citizens of Laguna, so that most of the fabulous, secluded cliff-top homes overlooking the beach and once inhabited by the likes of Bette Davis, Mary Pickford, Garland, Valentino, Chaplin and Mickey Rooney have been there for decades. The overwhelming attraction of Laguna Beach is the two-year-old Ritz-Carlton Hotel, in Laguna Niguel, just a few miles south of the town. The Ritz-Carlton is surely on the level of the most wonderful resort hotels I've ever visited - Caneel Bay and Little Dix Bay in the Virgin Islands, Mauna Kea and Mauna Lani on the Big Island of Hawaii, Villa d'Este on Lake Como. The kind of resort where the natural beauty is perfectly married to the taste and design of the hotel, where each bit of decor, service and food is brilliantly managed. For instance, the Ritz-Carlton Club in the Monarch Wing on the fourth, top floor of the hotel, reached only by a special elevator key. The elevator opens onto a sitting room presided over by a concierge whose role it is to serve the guests in every way - making massage reservations, fixing a drink from the open (and free) bar, freshening up the ever-present array of breakfast pastries, fruit, hors d'oeuvres, even making dinner arrangements for you at other restaurants in town. The rooms are charming and comfortable, as are each of the 393 rooms in the hotel. Although the Ritz-Carlton is relatively new, the sense upon driving up to the enormous porte-cochere and entering the typically California Spanish Mediterranean architecture, is that you might just bump into William Randolph Hearst or Louis B. Mayer in white linen suits, or any of the towering figures of a past regal Hollywood age. For this is truly a grand hotel, from the large public rooms with Italian marble, handwoven rugs and vases overflowing with fresh flowers, to the darkly elegant bar with year-round roaring fire, to the impressive art and antiques collection to the beauty of the setting - poised on a cliff 150 feet above the beach. One never yearns to move too far from the airy, spacious lobby with its afternoon high tea served in the library, or its buffet lunch, eaten while gazing through the massive French windows overlooking the sea. To do little else but stroll around and, over a glass of cream sherry in the lounge, watch the sun set, while a dignified pianist accompanies the magic, is surely a weekend of heaven. Most folks, we are told, do not leave the hotel grounds for days at a time, even for golf on the Links at Monarch Beach, the course next door designed by Robert Trent Jones, but certainly not to confront the Laguna Sunday scene up the highway. A walk, jog or swim on one of California's loveliest beaches below is appropriate, but when blissful inertia utterly takes over, there is a little shuttle to transport guests down and up the steep hill to the sand. Rooms at the Ritz-Carlton are sumptuously decorated, from the marble baths to the French doors that open to small terraces to the plush carpeting. There are 31 suites, and while staying in one, we counted five telephones. There are two swimming pools with Jacuzzis inside quiet courtyards, and probably to be stressed above all other visual wonders are the flowers and the landscaping, the product of 16 full-time gardeners. Two hundred fifty thousand new plants are installed every year, and the explosions of color throughout the property are a feast. If one is compelled to move one's body, the fitness center is well-equipped and offers frequent exercise classes. I rode a stationary bike one morning next to O. J. Simpson, a Laguna resident. Food at the Ritz-Carlton is the finest in the area, with a focus on fresh fish and seafood, prepared in that California cuisine style that mixes ingredients that may or may not be a match made in heaven. The dining room is elegant, with tuxedoed waiters and prices to match; our steamed salmon in sorrel sauce ($24) and Spanish red scampi in cilantro, tomato and sweet garlic sauce ($26) were splendid. The cafe is somewhat more casual and features trendy items like braised veal loin with porcini mushrooms ($17) and blackened beef filet in mustard-roquefort sauce ($21). The sunny Cafe Terrace for lunch and the mammoth Sunday brunch ($30) brings visitors from as far as Los Angeles. The Club Grill and Bar is fun for dancing to live music and offers a menu more traditionally American. In addition to the Ritz-Carlton, the exciting find in Laguna Beach is a wonderful Chinese restaurant, Five Feet (714-497-4955), in the middle of town. Billing itself as Chinese cuisine European style, it is not of the usual put-it-all-in-the-middle-and-share school, although that is precisely what one wants to do anyway. The specialty here is whole catfish ($21 to $23), brought in from Louisiana and prepared in a sweet and pungent sauce. The waiter told us the fish is such an unassailable tradition that practically every table orders one. We returned several nights in a row and were ecstatic over an appetizer of fresh mussels with black bean sauce ($7), seafood pasta ($16.50) and duck salad mixed with crabmeat in an orange and lemon sauce ($13.95). The joy of returning to Laguna over and over, as we do for periodic weekends during the year, is that each visit requires less and less activity. We've long since paid our tourist dues to the art-show-of-the-month, browsed the cute shops sufficient times. Now we can contentedly vegetate in that special splendor of air, sun and the Pacific that marks the entire California coast but nowhere with more loveliness than here. If you go Getting There  Driving time is 75 minutes from Los Angeles International Airport, 65 minutes from San Diego and 30 minutes from John Wayne-Orange County Airport. Where to Stay  Rooms at the Ritz-Carlton (telephone: 714-240-2000) range from $155 to $275 a night, suites from $500 to $1,500. Eiler's Inn (714-494-3004) on Pacific Coast Highway is a favorite bed and breakfast. Rooms for two are $85 to $150, including breakfast and wine and cheese in the afternoon. The Hotel Laguna (714-494-1151) is conveniently situated on the highway and the beach, and its outdoor terrace has a bar that is popular at sunset. Double rooms range from $65 to $85.  The Surf and Sand (714-497-4477) is also on the beach, with a busy bar. Rooms for two are $85 to $140. Where to Eat  Ron's (714-497-4871) in Laguna is another popular spot, with a charming terrace right on Pacific Coast Highway, a jazz trio or pianist, and an unsurprising but excellent menu. The fish is always fresh and the rack of lamb is tender. Dinner for two, with wine, is about $75. There is also a champagne brunch for $14.50 on weekends. Dizz's As Is (714-494-5250) is good for such complications as filet mignon topped with bacon and pate ($20.95), or Pesto Genovese with prawns ($20.95). For a traditional Mexican lunch on a superb terrace overlooking the ocean, try Las Brisas (714-497-5434). Lunch for two, with beer, is about $25. M. S.
