972|1987\01\04|A LEGENDARY FISH FROM GALILEE|A barren, arid wasteland extends up from the Dead Sea along the Jordan River, in the northern end of the Great Rift Valley that stretches up from Kenya to Syria; it is hard to understand how it could be part of the Fertile Crescent. The river is narrow here and has virtually disappeared with the drought of the past few years.|A barren, arid wasteland extends up from the Dead Sea along the Jordan River, in the northern end of the Great Rift Valley that stretches up from Kenya to Syria; it is hard to understand how it could be part of the Fertile Crescent. The river is narrow here and has virtually disappeared with the drought of the past few years. A barren, arid wasteland extends up from the Dead Sea along the Jordan River, in the northern end of the Great Rift Valley that stretches up from Kenya to Syria; it is hard to understand how it could be part of the Fertile Crescent. The river is narrow here and has virtually disappeared with the drought of the past few years. The heat is so oppressive and the landscape so bleak that one wonders why the Children of Israel chose to settle here and indeed, why it has been the site of confrontation for thousands of years. Until, that is, you enter the Galilee. This is the region most prominent in the Gospels, where the Sea of Galilee and the villages around it are mentioned frequently and from whose fishermen came Jesus' disciples. This is also where the capital of Judaism was established in the first century, after the burning of Jerusalem. Here, the sands give way to the rolling hills from which the area takes it name. They are covered with olive groves, fruit orchards, banana plantations and plentiful, lush vegetation. The climate becomes gentle and the Jordan reappears, flowing out of the southern end of the Sea of Galilee in a wide, meandering stream. In this lovely setting, at Kibbutz Kinneret, there is a baptism site, Yardenit, which is free to visitors. The sea is really a freshwater lake, harp-shaped and called Kinneret from the Hebrew word for stringed instrument. Josephus called it the Sea of Gennesar, because the plain of Gennesaret is just to the west; the ancient rabbis noted that the Lord created seven seas but the Sea of Gennesaret is His delight. It's also known as Lake Tiberias, after the town that Herod Antipas built on its shore and named in honor of Emperor Tiberius. In Arabic, it is still Bahret Tabariya. The lake lies 680 feet below sea level, is roughly half as wide as its 14-mile length and still, as in biblical times, supports a lively fishing industry. It teems with bourri (gray mullet), sardines, carp, perch and a kind of fish, called tilapia, that is better known as St. Peter's fish. This bony little denizen of the not-so-deep is said to have been the fish in whose mouth St. Peter found the shekel with which to pay his taxes. Today, it is still supplying shekels, not only to the fishermen of the lake but also to a whole industry that has grown around it. Fish farms cover more than 50,000 acres in the valleys. Tilapia hatchlings are collected and raised in the farm ponds. Although St. Peter's fish is available throughout Israel, it is at the lakeside restaurants in Tiberias that it seems to taste best. Perhaps it's that the Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes is said to have taken place at Tabigha nearby, perhaps it's the glorious setting with the Golan Heights rising across the waters, perhaps it's the alfresco dining. Ein Gev, the kibbutz directly opposite on the eastern shore, is probably the most widely known eating place of the area, but Tayalet Tiberias, the Promenade, is the most delightful. Stroll along the north end, under the big Israeli ficus and mimosa trees and look at the menus (they are written both in English and Hebrew) posted by Nof Kineret (Kinneret View), Cafe Hayam Eli (Eli's Cafe on the Sea) and Galei Gil (Waves of Joy); they are nearly identical, as are the prices. (Caramba, the dairy restaurant, doesn't serve fish.) Choose a table right on the water so you can toss some pita to the sardines, which will roil the water like piranha in a feeding frenzy, and order your meal. Typically, a meal at an Israeli restaurant begins with Oriental salads. In this country, Oriental means Middle Eastern, which includes Turkish and Greek with Moroccan, Syrian and Arabic. Many restaurants simply set an assortment in front of you and they are included in the price of the main course; at the Promenade restaurants, they are not. You can order them individually but it's best to ask for the plate of salads. A multitude of little dishes will be brought, along with a platter heaped with small, hot pitas, the round, hollow Arab bread. Tear off a piece and use it as a scoop for the hummus, a paste of ground chickpeas and spices, and tahini, a sauce of ground sesame seeds with a puddle of olive oil in the middle. Most of the salads are made with olive oil, lemon juice or vinegar, garlic and parsley and, except for eggplant salad, which can be one of a variety, the main ingredients stay the same from place to place. Now for the St. Peter's fish. You can order it grilled or fried (Galei Gil also does a sauce) and grilled is recommended, especially if you like crisp skin. The fish is very low in fat (1.5 to 3 percent) and high in protein (18 to 20 percent), has a white flesh that is so mild that even fish-haters love it and weighs about one pound soaking wet. It comes to the table on a bed of shredded lettuce, whole with head, fins and tail, and accompanied by very good french fries and a green salad. It's largely bone; start at the head and eat toward the tail. There's not much flesh, but as Spencer Tracy once said in another context, ''What there is, is cherce.'' The fish that is exported to the United States and elsewhere come from the larger farm fish and is available in fillets of about four and a half ounces each. They can be used in any recipe calling for a mild, white fish. The restaurants use some fish from the lake but most of theirs, too, come from the farms. With the meal, try the sweet, black Israeli beer. Sweet-tasting food and drink, in fact, seem to be an Israeli passion. The desserts are creams and pastries, with the Oriental (again, read Middle Eastern) pastries heavy on the honey. There are strawberries and melon in season. Turkish coffee, which is boiled, thick and strong, is also sweet. A meal for four will cost about $60. Galei Gil is open from 8 A.M. to midnight, Nof Kineret from 9 A.M. to midnight, and Cafe Hayam Eli from 9 A.M. to 2 A.M. All are open every day except Yom ha-Shoa (Holocaust Day), which falls on April 26 this year, and Yom Kippur, which is on Oct. 3. Tiberias is a superlative base for sightseeing and relaxing, with several deluxe hotels. The town's hot springs have been an attraction since antiquity. Getting There  Tiberias is about a three-hour drive from Tel Aviv going via Haifa. It takes as long from Jerusalem, traveling via Jericho. Where to Stay  Tiberias is a resort city and has camping sites and hostels as well as hotels and spas. The hot springs south of the city (Hammat Tiberias) are 140 degrees and have been in use since biblical times. The Tiberias Plaza (92233) is a luxurious hotel right on the lake; prices in high season (Dec. 19 to Jan. 4, April 20 to May 4, Oct. 3 to 6 and 17 to 26) are $90 to $120 for two, in low season (June 1 to July 16 and Nov. 16 to March 1), $80 to $95 and $80 to $110 for the rest of the year. Galei Kinneret (92331), also on the lake, is $87 to $107 in high season, $65 to $85 in low season and $75 to $85 at other times. Ganai Hamat (92890) is a little over a mile out of town on the lake road, offering its own beach and special rates at the Tiberias Hot Springs spa next to it. In high season, a double costs $90, in low season, $46; regular rates are $54. All the above rates include breakfast but do not include a 15 percent service charge. Travelers would be wise to verify rates upon booking as they change frequently. Tours  The Kinneret Sailing Company has a daily, year-round service from the Promenade to Ein Gev, with additional trips in the summer. There is an excellent guided walking tour every Wednesday, leaving from the Tiberias Plaza Hotel. Egged Tours (20474) and Galilee Tours (20330) run daily sightseeing trips by bus. For more information, contact the Israeli Government Tourist Office, 350 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10118 (212-560-0650) or the Tourist Information Office, 8 Elhadeff Street, Tiberias, Israel (20992).E. D. G. FARE OF THE COUNTRY
