973|1987\01\04|UNHURRIED KARIBA|The lion was suddenly there, fixed and big and tawny in the headlights. Correction: January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition|The lion was suddenly there, fixed and big and tawny in the headlights. The lion was suddenly there, fixed and big and tawny in the headlights. For a split second it paused, framed by the pale, brittle grass of the bushlands, its hard young eyes frozen in the glare. There was an intimacy in our encounter, tinged with excitement and fear. This was not, after all, some organized safari through the bushlands, but a sighting on the main tarred highway between Karoi and Makuti, before the road tumbles over the Zambezi escarpment on a route that could be traced from the Cape halfway to Cairo. The traveler had not gone looking for lion, but the lion had nonetheless appeared, a whiff of wildness without mercy, on the tarred road that men had laid down to assert a frail mastery over these lands, a dominance challenged by the apparition. After the brief moment, it was gone, hunting perhaps, on some foul mission, for there were people living not far from the highway, people in huts, with chickens and children and goats all about them, aware always of the sly footfall in the dark betraying an imminent pounce. For six years, sometimes frequently, sometimes fitfully, I have traveled the road from Harare, Zimbabwe's capital, to the lake at Kariba and its islands. But there had been a gap of two years since the last time, and I was returning to keep a long-delayed tryst without the certainty that things had not changed in my absence. So the lion bore a promise that things were not so different after all, and that soon I would be encased in a world where its paramountcy was acknowledged and treasured, and where humans tread lightly in a wilderness, ironically, of their own making. Sometime in the 50's, Africa's erstwhile colonial rulers, with the audacity of overlords in an alien land, thought of building a dam that would stem the Zambezi River and flood its valley for 175 miles downstream of the Victoria Falls, creating both a new source of hydroelectric power and a stark, new beauty at the continent's heart. And so, after wranglings and doubts, they went ahead and did it, and the valley began to fill in the 60's, turning hilltops into islands, sending tens of thousands of Batonga tribespeople to higher ground and trapping game and birds too weak to flee the valley. The animals were rescued by Operation Noah, as it was named by the conservationists who mounted it, and brought to safety in a new reserve created for them, called Matusadona. Then, in the early 70's, regardless of a bush war just beginning, and long ended now, people began to build wilderness retreats on the new islands formed by the manmade lake at Kariba. These camps, at Spurwing and Fothergill islands, marked the end of my 230-mile journey from Harare. As I drove down the last, snaking stretch to Kariba, I wondered if the islands had changed. After all, no place, no continent, is immutable; human pressures build and erode the wild; people poach or are careless or grow tired of the effort to conserve and move on, leaving their creations to crumble. When traveling, the voyager sometimes seeks auguries; I chose the balding spare tire that was already in use due to a puncture earlier on. If it goes flat before Kariba, say, other things will go wrong; if it holds up, then the journey will be worthwhile. The spare held, and dawn the next day redeemed the lion's promise. The lake stretched in the hard light, across to the mountains and the Sanyati Gorge that slices through them, and to the islands, places laden with memories of earlier trips - the cold lunches on days almost too hot for breathing; the squalls that hammered at my powerboat; the fish that were lost and the friends who had departed, and most of all, the peace of total isolation, on an island where first light arrives through slatted blinds, painting bars of gold on the mosquito netting. For what is a safari all about if not to be alone, cut off from the cities and the highways and the noise and dirt? And what can offer greater isolation than an island, a dot on a chart showing wild, uninhabited lands to one side and 18 miles of water to the other, a divide from the lights of the mainland that sets the mind to an unhurried rhythm? You still approach Spurwing and Fothergill by water, nudging between the spectral, petrified tree stumps that survived the filling of the lake and still stretch upward in crazy, anguished shapes - here, a hand imploring from the deep; there, two stately trunks that lean toward each other, a ceremonial archway never to be completed. And still, before a drumbeat announces that dinner is served, when people recount their day to others, there is much talk of boats and water and fish so big that only a thwarted angler could even conceive their magnitude. But, these last four years, the rains, as elsewhere in Africa, have been capricious, failing totally sometimes and bringing drought, or blessing some places while leaving others to thirst. The water of the lake is low and there are oddities. A red channel marker at Fothergill, for instance, is left high and dry, a marooned sentry far from water; on the mainland, at Kariba, the marina gasoline station that used to float is beached, and a harbor is overgrown with grass. Worse still, the tree stumps, exposed now in the lake, have become harsh fangs that could pierce a hull; they appear in places on the water where years ago I had pushed the throttle of my boat forward to head for new fishing ground. The islands have become temporary peninsulas, connected to the mainland game reserve by land suddenly bared, awaiting the rains from the north, in the Zambezi catchment area, that will restore their status. Not this year, so the wisdom runs, for it is too late and the rains have ended; but maybe next year, or the next. The continent does not provide a ready answer, beyond the faith that its capriciousness will bring good after bad, as it sometimes does. Yet when the dawn spills over the harbor, in front of the thatched lodge that is my temporary home, or at Africa's quick sunset, far across the lake in another country, there seems no tie to the mainland. The mood is still an island mood, and the water remains the custodian of solitude and escape. But to do? What is there to do? Rob Macdonald, the manager at Spurwing, says they ask this, the overseas visitors in particular, not yet attuned to the pace, Americans especially, wanting a neat package of game sightings and comforts and then departure. Well, it can be done, and it is done. There are motorized safaris from both islands, and game walks in elephant country, led by Rob Fynn, the owner of Fothergill, who is a professional guide and carries a rifle. And there are boat trips close to the shore where buffaloes and elephants graze in the lush grass that has regenerated on the land left bare by the falling waters. There are bucks and lions and birds, storks and goliath herons, fish eagles that beckon the trees to rise from the water with their haunting call. But in this small world, encased by bushland and water, there is, most of all, peace - the mainland and the tarred roads and the hotels with discos and casinos are far distant, and on the water, in the heat, where you are idly fishing or watching the elephants at their leisurely defoliation, no one can intrude. The day begins, ideally, at dawn, before breakfast is served for the late sleepers who defy the sunlight turning the dark thatch to a mellowed ocher. Then, in October, say, the peak fishing season, to head out early across the water toward the Sanyati Gorge is to seek the promise fulfilled. The lake, as we used to joke on those rough days when the chop seared over the bows, can be a cruel mistress. The wind can come up from nowhere, and churn the water so, that the circumspect will busy themselves with trivial tasks in the harbor, like polishing the chrome around the bows, while the impatient go fishing. But this time it is calmer, and the tigerfish, Hydrocynus vittatus, or striped water dog, bite ferociously for a morning, turning suddenly sated by 11 A.M. as the heat builds. We have tied up in a clump of trees, a spot chosen by the guide, a man called Champion, the skipper of the hired, 18-foot powerboat. Champion seems normally taciturn, catching his share of fish using a bait of freshwater sardines, known locally as kapenta, while the visitor tries a fly rod with less success. But his eyes scan water and land in quest of signs that at first eluded me. ''Baboon,'' Champion says, pointing to a patch of the mainland. The visitor, at first, sees nothing - then they arrive, a family of baboons shambling past a herd of bucks. ''Buffalo, see. There.'' He points again as the broad, black back of a buffalo rises above the grass of a lake shore that, when I first visited here, had been covered by water. A hundred yards away, amid the stumps, the water swirls suddenly, and the pink-gray head that rises from the water, snuffling, needs no introduction: hippo, about four of them, surfacing and sinking to their own rhythm, distant and harmless. But then, as the heat grows toward noon and we cruise the fishing spots, Champion espies another sight - a baby hippopotamus, vulnerable, close by the bank, only the top of its head showing clear of the water. Champion edges closer, and the mother surfaces, snorting and angry at the intrusion. Still the boat moves closer until we are a bare 10 yards from mother and calf. ''Back off, Champion,'' I say, instantly regretting the uncertainty, the fear, that forced the command. Later, telling the story to Rob Macdonald at Spurwing, he agrees: Don't get too close to a nursing hippo, it's not worth it, he says, without needing to add that she'll overturn the boat and close those huge jaws on whatever flails in the water, and if the hippo doesn't get you, the crocs probably will. That caution is typical of those in charge at Fothergill and Spurwing, and reassuring. There have been accidents because people don't accept the wildness of wild animals and become blase, strolling unaccompanied out of camp, or acting cavalier about the buffalo that stray into camp. Not too long ago, they say, Rob Fynn had to shoot an elephant that charged a party on a walking safari. We can go close to elephants in the Land-Rovers for photographs, says Frik Maas, Fothergill's manager, but only because we know each herd personally and have a chance to second-guess their behavior. Out on the lake, while viewing game by boat, you can get close to the elephants, too, approaching the shore as they feed, no threat to them. Six years ago, business was not as good on the islands as it is now, and the traveler could simply arrive for lunch and find, probably, that there would be accommodation, too. That has changed. In Harare, I was told that both Fothergill and Spurwing were fully booked for the weekend. Fortunately, there had been a cancellation, so I was given a lodge of thatch with a shower and toilet and mosquito nets over comfortable beds and a view over the grasslands that used to be covered by water. If the rains are good for a couple of years, they reckon, the lake will again be at the doorstep of the lodges, filling the night with its lap and wash. At evening, this time, as the sky turned a special kind of orange-mauve, I stood on a track near the camp, near the huge cables strung between the trees to keep elephants away, and watched Africa's rapid gloaming, a visible descent of a huge, glaring sun, timed in seconds as it fell below the hills of Zambia on the other side of the lake. Reinforced in isolation by the water, I strolled back, knowing that soon the lake would be dotted with the pinprick lights of the kapenta rigs, fishing with nets that resemble pelican jaws, lowered beneath a spotlight at each of their sterns. Then, I thought, a supper and an early bed, and at dawn the following day I would be back on the lake. There would be no urgency, and the fish would bite, and I'd release the small fry and leave the bigger ones for Champion to take home to the myriad pots of the mainland. In the bar, I eavesdropped on a conversation between an American couple and an English couple; they were bemoaning the fact that, the next day, their program had a two-hour gap in it, and how could you come all this way and waste time like that? They hadn't, I thought, got the hang of it, not yet.  If you go The Road to the Islands  Kariba can be reached either by road or by air. A medium-size sedan can be hired in Harare for about $35 a day plus about 70 cents a mile. The drive takes about four hours, and the last 30 miles from Makuti to Kariba run through a wildlife reserve. The transfer by boat from the mainland to either island costs about $40 a person, round trip. The scheduled flight on Air Zimbabwe from Harare to Kariba is about $75 round trip; the airstrip is on Fothergill Island. Bed and Board  Accommodations on Fothergill Island, with all meals, range from about $35 to $45 a person a night, plus $37.50 a day if the visitor wants a full program of organized safaris. Boat hire, with fuel and driver in a reliable 18-footer, works out to a little over $75 a day. Accommodations on Spurwing range from tents set on concrete slabs for about $35 a person a night to cabins with private toilets and showers for about $50. Game-viewing drives and water cruises cost about $15 a person; boat hire fees range from about $18 a day for a canoe to about $65 (plus fuel) for a launch with an outboard engine. Bookings for either Fothergill or Spurwing may be made through Abercrombie & Kent, 1420 Kensington Road, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521 (telephone: 312-954-2944 or 800-323-7308), or through agents in Harare. Package rates are also available. Looking at Animals  Game viewing is best done during the African winter, from May to August, when temperatures are in the 70's and 80's, the grass is low and the animals gravitate toward the waters of the lake. Visitors should come armed with antimalaria medication (cerebral malaria is the main risk, and no one takes it lightly), insect repellent and long-sleeved shirts for protection against both the sun and mosquitoes. A hat is essential. Film should be bought in advance. Tiger and Other Fishing  For anglers, October is the best month for tigerfish, but temperatures can soar into the 90's and above. Take along a good sunscreen - but get someone else to apply it. Experts suggest that tigerfish are put off by any taint of sun lotion on bait or lures. Bait can be bought on the islands, and tackle is generally available at Angler's Corner, Baker Avenue, Harare. Bright red and silvery Mepps lures, with a large single hook, catch tigerfish, as do gaudy bass streamers in red, black, white and silver (the bigger the better). Wire leader is essential since tigerfish have sharp teeth, and a hook sharpener should be included in the gear because tigerfish have a hard mouth and setting the hook can be difficult. The record tigerfish for the lake is about 34 pounds. There is also good fishing for freshwater bream and a variety of other species, including a local catfish known as vundu. Smaller hooks and worm bait are used for bream. Vundu eat just about anything (including, it is said, carbolic soap) and night fishing for them usually involves heavy line, big hooks and some effort: the Zimbabwean record for a vundu, caught in the Zambezi in 1981, is more than 100 pounds. A. C. Correction:  January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
