974|1987\01\04|ZURICH'S HAVEN OF GENIUS AND JOVIALITY| I am at home in few places  In the house over the lake  On the other side of the moon  On the stage of the theater  Surrounded by side scenes  And in the Kronenhalle  In Mother Zumsteg's empire  The liver-dumpling soup steams . . .  - From ''Kronenhalle''  by Friedrich Durrenmatt| I am at home in few places  In the house over the lake  On the other side of the moon  On the stage of the theater  Surrounded by side scenes  And in the Kronenhalle  In Mother Zumsteg's empire  The liver-dumpling soup steams . . .  - From ''Kronenhalle''  by Friedrich Durrenmatt I am at home in few places  In the house over the lake  On the other side of the moon  On the stage of the theater  Surrounded by side scenes  And in the Kronenhalle  In Mother Zumsteg's empire  The liver-dumpling soup steams . . .  - From ''Kronenhalle''  by Friedrich Durrenmatt Switzerland's Friedrich Durrenmatt, known for his plays of ambiguous message, is not so abstruse when it comes to his stomach. He favors liver-dumpling soup at the Kronenhalle in Zurich, where he settles in by the window, sometimes with Federico Fellini. They are part of a fitting tradition: The restaurant has been a surrogate home to a century of genius. Hulda Zumsteg, its proprietress, who died two years ago at age 94, was fond of recalling old friends and patrons - Richard Strauss, Igor Stravinsky, Bertolt Brecht, Cristobal Balenciaga. Thomas Mann liked the red room - it reminded him of a German luxury ship. Braque and Miro sat around the tables, and they hang on the walls; Picasso, too. But the most devoted habitue, the one whose regular seat everyone asks to see, if not sit in, was James Joyce. ''Joyce lived here for eight years,'' says Gustav Zumsteg, Hulda's son and the Kronenhalle's owner. ''He came here every day. And he left this place to die.'' Joyce liked Wiener schnitzel and goulash, smoked cigars and stared up into the corner, then went home to work on ''Finnegans Wake.'' Hulda Zumsteg was his dear friend. And he treated young Gustav as his own son, told him fairy tales, talked about birds and the beauty of life, gave him the pen he used to write ''Finnegans Wake.'' It was the restaurant's warmth and sparkle that attracted Joyce. ''The door,'' he said, ''locked out all the disappointment.'' Mother Zumsteg is dead, as are many old friends, but the Kronenhalle, alive with their heirs, endures as a pantheon. These days Durrenmatt can bump into Yves Saint Laurent, Catherine Deneuve, Placido Domingo, who join a bustle of Zurichers and foreigners, carpenters, shippers, princes and playboys and ordinary people. Zurich hotel concierges name the Kronenhalle their most frequently requested restaurant reservation. Its appeal? The food: simple, Swiss, classic. The atmosphere: hospitable, jovial. The art, the celebrities, the legend. ''This is one of the few places where one can still dream,'' explains Mr. Zumsteg. The legend began with Hulda Zumsteg, an institution inseparable from the one she made. A poor shoemaker's daughter, she left the provinces at age 18 to find work in the city, first as a servant, then as a waitress. Possessed with vision and a will for hard work, she came to conquer that city, became its doyenne. Balenciaga dressed her; Miro painted birthday greetings to her; Willie Varlin, the Swiss portraitist, painted her. Her portrait, which you can't miss in the Kronenhalle, is reproduced in ''Zurich: Metropolis on the Limmat,'' a pictorial biography, on a page devoted to Varlin's prominent Zurichers. When she died, Zurich saw something like a state funeral. ''It was like one for a queen,'' recalls the first head waiter, Johann Kloimstein. Hulda married a restaurateur, Gottlieb Zumsteg, saved every franc and bought an established but run-down Kronenhalle in 1921. She insisted on the finest linen, crockery, cutlery and cuisine. This Zumsteg philosophy has not changed, nor have some original recipes, passed down from chef to chef as a matter of policy. The first chef and cook specialized in regional dishes - boiled meat, red cabbage, noodles and soup. When a French chef was recruited, the Kronenhalle menu -and fame - became international. Today the original regional dishes are served on the trolley, a 50-year-old Kronenhalle custom that offers a daily lunch and dinner for about $21. Friday lunch is smoked pork with lentils; Wednesday and Saturday, bollito misto (boiled beef, sausage, chicken, tongue), tete de veau (head of veal) and marrow cooked in bouillon with cabbage, leeks and celery. Other days the trolley fare differs - a glazed calf breast for lunch, roast lamb for dinner -according to the season and market. Mrs. Zumsteg also inspired the restaurant's welcoming atmosphere, appearing every evening to greet every guest. Today the family warmth is extended by her son, her granddaughter, Vreny Gerhartz, who helps Mr. Zumsteg, and a staff known for its longevity. Mr. Zumsteg calls the Kronenhalle his hobby - in ''real life'' he owns Abraham Silk, which makes fabrics for, among others, Yves Saint Laurent, Givenchy, Valentino. But he has managed the restaurant for 29 years, lives upstairs, and is intent on maintaining its traditions and character. When he renovated the premises between 1981 and 1985 he made sure everything looked exactly the same. According to Mr. Zumsteg, he persuaded his mother to open the Kronenhalle Bar, in 1965, to keep the restaurant accessible to the young and ''unmoneyed.'' And it is often crowded at night with a cross-section of Zurich. ''The important people,'' he says, ''have simple tastes.'' As for new trends in food, he acknowledges their contribution, but not on his menu. ''Personally I am for the great tradition of cooking, and our cooking is based on that tradition. You will never get nouvelle cuisine here.'' Mr. Zumsteg has added his own touches. Hanging on the Kronenhalle's walls, as casually as a bunch of $10 prints, are Klees and Kandinskys, Braques and Bonnards, a Cezanne, a Monet. Art is his passion. He has counted great artists among his friends, collected their works since he was a young man. The restaurant's paintings are the overflow from his homes in Zurich and Paris. The Kronenhalle, which means hall of crowns, is in a five-story, gray, Biedermeier building, Zurich solid-discreet. The address is 4 Ramistrasse (telephone, 251 02 56). It could be a shuttered town house or bank but for six gold crowns above six first-floor windows and two pre-Zumsteg lanterns hanging by chains from gold-crowned bronze heads. There are three dining rooms. The brasserie or traditional hall, for 80, is the center of the Kronenhalle, buzzing and historic. A masculine room of dark wood-paneled walls and wood floors, coat racks and tufted green leather benches with buttons, old chandeliers, tall Diffenbachia plants, it distills the restaurant's German Swiss past. Emblems of Zurich's medieval guilds border the walls above black wooden signs for Tuborg and Lowenbrau Munchen. Posters announce the Opernhaus and Schauspielhaus seasons. The Neue Zurcher Zeitung and Der Bund hang from newspaper racks. Mrs. Zumsteg by Varlin - a magnificent figure with upswept hair, designer dress, dragon bracelet by Benvenuto Cellini - peers out on her legacy. The adjacent Chagall room, Mann's favorite, is dominated by the artist's ''Glaieuls,'' bright red and white gladioluses against vivid blue. More private, it seats 55 in an old-Europe aura of rich stained-glass windows, Persian carpets and red: pleated lampshades, leather chairs, thick velvet curtains. The upstairs room, for 60, is more formal and clublike, with dinner taken amid noiseless thick carpets, white cafe curtains and dark wood. Note the playful Miro, ''Pour Maman Hulda Zumsteg.'' For a table in the brasserie, reservations should be made at least two days ahead. In the Chagall and upstairs rooms, reservations can be made the same day. The Kronenhalle serves coffee and snacks as well as lunch and dinner and changes in mood from mellow to madhouse. Four to six is the quietest time, when patrons relax over coffee served on informal green and white cloths, and writers sit down to write. Saturday lunch is prolonged, the guest book whipped out for Roman Polanski or Claude Terrail, visiting from his three-star Tour d'Argent in Paris. Busiest nights are Tuesdays and Fridays. On a typical Friday the bar is packed out by 6. (The bar is open daily from 11:30 A.M. to midnight, the restaurant from noon to midnight.) Ears are near-deafened by the chatter in German, Italian, French. Diego Giacometti's bronze, owl-shaped lamps, Athenian symbols of wisdom and night, light up a crush of people - the collegians in Fair Isle and denim, artists in black leather, pillars of Zurich society in beige mink - standing sardine-style or seated on green leather couches around rust marble tables (bronze feet by Giacometti). The chief bartender, Peter Roth, is concocting one of his prize-winning drinks. The Ladykiller ($7), with Gordon's gin, Cointreau, apricot brandy and passion-fruit and pineapple juice, garnished with a rose-shaped orange peel and a green maraschino, is his most famous. Drinks are served with salted almonds, paprika potato chips and Bundnerfleisch ($13), that Swiss delicacy of smoked, dried, thinly sliced beef. The walk to the brasserie is like the entrance one makes into a good party. There is a buzz. Women wear Chanel, real jewels, mink headbands, khaki; men wear loud ties, black tie, old school ties, no ties. Some have brought their babies and dogs. The room is also dressed up: two giant bouquets, birds of paradise or red Hawaiian anthurium, flank the Zumsteg family table. Dinner is served on white linen, blue and white English china, and eaten with silver. Waiters wear white jackets, black ties; waitresses, black dresses, embroidered white aprons. The choice of cuisine is simple or classic, beef goulash with dumplings or trout with white wine. There is an a la carte menu (with an English translation) and a plats du jour menu. Meals are eaten with Burli, a slightly sour peasant bread. Most traditional dishes are served with golden Rosti - boiled, diced, fried, then baked, potatoes, crisp on the outside, soft on the inside, the national dish of German Switzerland. A good Swiss meal might start with veal sausage salad ($10) and bouillon with pancake and marrow ($4.50), go on with veal steak, cream sauce, morels and noodles ($25) or shredded calf's liver and Rosti ($22) and end with Zuger Kirschtorte ($3.50). Aigle ($25 the bottle) and Dezaley ($32) are first-class Swiss white wines from the Vaud canton, very dry, round in the bouquet, a hint of a bubble. Dole des Monts ($20) is a dry red from Valais, comparable to a pleasant, light Burgundy. The Reserve de la Patronne is a red burgundy ($14 a carafe). An international alternative: blinis with smoked salmon and caviar ($19), oxtail soup with sherry ($5), grilled turbot with English potatoes ($28) or young chicken with rosemary, risotto and bolets ($23). For dessert: grapefruit sorbet with vodka ($6) or fruit salad ($6) that comes with kiwi, passion fruit, papaya, mangoes, strawberries and pineapple. As dinner starts, Irma, a Kronenhalle waitress for 10 years, wishes a hearty ''Bon appetit.'' When plates are depleted she inquires, ''Fini?'' -then serves a full second portion on fresh plates. In the meantime, the mood has revved up. Nino the clown walks in selling flowers. The Salvation Army pays its Friday night visit, sings ''Lass den Sonnenschein Herein,'' plays the guitar, hands out its newspaper. Dogs bark and babies clap hands. ''Clowns, hymns, dogs, babies, cats,'' says Mr. Kloimstein, the head waiter. ''everything is here.''
