975|1987\01\04|BEHEMOTH ON THE PRAIRIE|Snow whistles across the icy highway in Edmonton, Alberta, 350 miles north of the Canada-United States border. The temperature is 20 degrees below zero. As the airport taxi skates across the road, the driver says, ''You'd better enjoy this weather. This is a heat wave here. Things can only get worse.|Snow whistles across the icy highway in Edmonton, Alberta, 350 miles north of the Canada-United States border. The temperature is 20 degrees below zero. As the airport taxi skates across the road, the driver says, ''You'd better enjoy this weather. This is a heat wave here. Things can only get worse. Snow whistles across the icy highway in Edmonton, Alberta, 350 miles north of the Canada-United States border. The temperature is 20 degrees below zero. As the airport taxi skates across the road, the driver says, ''You'd better enjoy this weather. This is a heat wave here. Things can only get worse.'' Maybe not. A giant, ice-framed billboard proclaims our destination: the Fantasyland Hotel. The sign features a bevy of blondes reclining and eating grapes in decidedly un-frigid surroundings. The hotel opened in October and is the latest jewel in the crown of the West Edmonton Mall, by far the world's largest shopping center. The mall, covering 110 acres and on two levels, includes a copy of the Versailles fountains, a re-creation of New Orleans's Bourbon Street, a miniature golf course modeled on Pebble Beach and an indoor amusement park, Canada Fantasyland, whose name, scale and style strongly suggest Disney. There are a half-dozen cuddly-looking tiger, lion and bear cubs, Wayne Gretzky, the hockey superstar, and teammates practicing slap shots and a five-acre wave pool that will be used for surfing championships next spring. Oh yes, and there are 836 stores selling everything from diamonds and dog food to dining-room sets. Best of all, in these frosty environs, everything is indoors: You can lean against a palm, sip a lemonade and smile at the snow piled on the glass roof. Contrary to predictions of some experts, the $750 million mall has become a major tourist attraction, drawing an average of 400,000 people a week, two-thirds of them from out of town. The first phase opened in 1981 and second and third phases were added in 1983 and 1985. ''I swear we have built a permanent Expo in Edmonton,'' says Bahman Ghermezian, the youngest of the four brothers who own the mall, referring to last summer's successful Expo 86 in Vancouver. The success is such that a similar mall, to be named the Mall of America, is to be built in Bloomington, a suburb of Minneapolis. Ground-breaking for what may turn out to be twice as big a monument to mass marketing is set for next May. Plans call for a reproduction of Piccadilly Circus and the canals of Venice (with singing gondoliers) as well as both the elegant Right Bank and bohemian Left Bank in Paris. The Ghermezians are also involved in negotiations with New York State and the Province of Ontario over which will provide more government help to build an even larger mall. Governor Cuomo has promised $400 million in tax and other concessions for a megamall at Niagara Falls. ''It is the best thing that could happen to any city in the world,'' says Nader Ghermezian, the second brother, of the third mall project. ''It will be the largest, most comprehensive tourist attraction ever built.'' On the way to the West Edmonton Mall, half an hour after passing that enticing billboard, our cab is sliding to a stop in front of the ice-draped Fantasyland Hotel. The door is opened smartly by a tall man in a scarlet and blue Mountie uniform, made taller still by his Dudley Doright hat. Inside, the doorman hands the bags to bellmen wearing sandals and skimpy Roman togas. Checking in, one notices the smiling receptionists, all women and all wearing equally skimpy Hawaiian-style attire with pink leis around their tanned necks. The choice of rooms they suggest ranges from Polynesian suites where guests lie on water beds modeled after warrior catamarans under full sail to Roman rooms with white marble sculpture and columns and what is termed an authentic Roman bath. Among the 120 theme rooms - of the 360 in the hotel - are some in Hollywood style with 1950's neon, a black-tile bath and an enormous video screen. It is difficult to decide which room to select. All have enormous Jacuzzi baths, an array of mirrors on the walls and ceilings and bars stocked with caviar and champagne. I chose the Truck Room, with the bed fashioned from the back of a real Chevrolet pickup. On one wall hung a giant Stop sign, on the opposite a Yield sign, and in the corner stood a tall Shell gas pump with the price labeled at 29 cents a gallon. The yellow line stretching out across the blacktop carpet bespoke journeys and horizons and lonely adventure while a lifesize policeman glistening in the always changing traffic light stared into the sunken Jaccuzi. Rooms like this are perhaps hard to leave. This is true even for children, who make up about half the guests. (All sofas can be unfolded into beds, and youngsters can sleep in various unconventional places, including the cab of the pickup.) But the mall beckons. One of the first establishments the visitor encounters on stepping from the lobby of the hotel into the shopping mall is a Bank of America branch changing money for Americans. About a third of the mall's visitors are Americans, and since the Canadian dollar is worth less than their own they pay about 72 cents for a Canadian dollar. Just around the corner is an 80-foot-long Spanish galleon, a copy of Columbus's Santa Maria, floating in a tree-lined, indoor lagoon. It is this mix of the unexpected and expected that most characterizes the West Edmonton Mall. A few steps along, for example, is a 650-year-old, hand-carved pagoda, eight feet tall, in front of a lingerie shop. The visitor can walk a half-mile on one level of the building and a half-mile back on the other. Wheelchairs can be rented for $3.50 a day, strollers for $3 and motorized scooters, with shopping baskets, for $2 for the first hour and $1.50 for each additional. (Prices have been converted to United States dollars.) On Europa Boulevard, Cartier, Ralph Lauren, Saint Laurent and Courreges all display their wares. Canadian Tire, for your hardware needs, overlooks it all. If you emerge into the mall from the second floor of the hotel, you can buy a luxury car across from the adjoining chapel in which shoppers may pray, marry or, using a mall credit card, arrange a funeral. There is plenty to eat as well as buy. Gumbo and jambalaya are served at the Cafe Orleans on Bourbon Street, hamburgers at Fudricker's across the street. Offerings in the 35-store Gourmet Court, a palace of fast food, include a 70-cent Japanese shish kebab at Shogun, a $3.50 calamari (squid) dinner at Aesop's Table and a 75-cent portion of french fries at the Fresh Fry Company. In all, there are 110 places to eat, including 3 McDonald's. Among many places to buy a drink is the Sherlock Holmes Restaurant and Pub where more than 100 regulars maintain personal mugs - ''No. 9, please.'' At Puck's, you can quaff a margarita beneath more pictures of Wayne Gretzky than you dreamed existed. Of other diversions, the newest is the World Waterpark where thousands line up for 22 water slides with such names as Sky Screamer, Cannonball Run and Blue Bullet. An inner-tube slide twists and turns under six waterfalls. Then, when a foghorn sounds, parrots squawk, flamingos rustle and hundreds of shoppers scream, ''Surf's up!'' It is the moment for waves to appear at the far end of the wave pool, spreading and building up to a height of six feet. Scores of people shoot across them on rented air mattresses. Near the Waterpark is the submarine ride around the lagoon. It is billed as being better than Disney's because the 24-passenger submarines are real, although one cannot help but notice they run on tracks. Another claim is that the mall owns more submarines -four - than the Canadian Navy, a point that loses its impressiveness when the guide says that two of the Navy's subs have been cannibalized for spare parts for the third, which has not been running too well. On our cruise the submarine passes coral reefs, real and artificial sharks, barracudas and other sea creatures and narrowly escapes the effects of a mock dynamite blast. The worst moment comes when the sub becomes disconnected from the track - a genuine misadventure - and we must wait for a diver to descend 15 feet to reconnect us. In Fantasyland, which the mall describes as the world's biggest indoor amusement park, families wait in often long lines for such rides as an old-fashioned merry-go-round or the terrifying Drop of Doom. But one major ride is temporarily closed: It is the Mindbender, a high-speed corkscrew of a roller coaster, which crashed in June, killing three people and seriously injuring another. The Ghermezian brothers say that they and their families promise to be the first riders when a redesigned Mindbender is allowed to resume after repairs and government scrutiny. An official of the park says permission has been given for it to start running again on March 1. But for many, the best thing about the mall is the mall itself. Malls, William Severini Kowinski argued in his 1985 book, ''The Malling of America,'' are essentially an extension of television for the television generations. ''Watching TV we can be everywhere without being anywhere in particular,'' he wrote. ''And basically, television and the mall are in the same business: entertainment in order to sell products.'' Most of the ideas for fantasy rooms, exotic animals and other attractions came from the Ghermezian brothers themselves. ''But we do not do business for glory,'' Bahman Ghermezian declares. Rather, he says, this family of emigres from Iran achieved a Canadian variation of the age-old American dream. They arrived with beautiful carpets, turned those into real estate profits and proceeded to develop ever more beautiful projects. If the tastes their mall represents are stalwartly middle class, so what? Most people's are. Bahman tells of his father, Jacob, now 85, who operated a large bazaar, the shopping center of its time, in Samarkand before the Russian Revolution swept away private property. According to Bahman, Jacob Ghermezian told his sons when they were young, ''When you grow up, I want you to build the biggest building in the world.'' Now, Jacob rouses friends his own age for hikes in the mall, picking them up in the morning and returning them in late afternoon. ''Sleep isn't good for you,'' he tells them. He carries a pocketful of Fantasyland tickets for children who promise not to smoke. Some 15,000 children came to the mall to trick or treat on Halloween, with candy courtesy of the Ghermezians. Valentine's Day in 1988 as well as next Feb. 14 is completely booked at the Fantasyland Hotel. And each month people throw $7,000 of coins into the mall's fountains. The money is passed on to charity. On leaving Edmonton I discovered a minibus to the airport that charges $5. (Taking a cab costs $22.) The driver, stopping at another Ghermezian hotel, offers to buy me a coffee, and with the temperature at 10 degrees below zero and falling the offer is appreciated. ''The nice thing about the mall,'' the driver says, ''is that you can forget what's happening outside.''  An Edmonton checklist Buying Selectively  At first glance the West Edmonton Mall would seem to something of a bargain. Alberta has no sales tax and for Americans a beneficial exchange rate means they can buy Canadian dollars at roughly 72 cents each. Moreover, there is lots of price-leveling competition: The mall has 55 stores, for example, selling nothing but women's shoes. Americans should be cautious, however, because on purchases totaling more than $400 United States Customs levies duties averaging 10 percent. If the shopper has been north of the border less than 48 hours, the 10 percent is levied on goods worth more than $25. The worst deals are on items made in the United States, which are subject to Canadian import duty. Products from Europe and Asia face duties similar to those imposed by the United States and are generally priced the same as south of the border. Canadian wares are generally the cheapest. The mall is open from Monday to Friday from 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., Saturday, 10 to 6, and Sunday, noon to 6. The mall's information number is 403-444-5200. Price Tags  Here are some sample prices: On Europa Boulevard, at Le Papillon, a gold and black skirt and top by the Italian designer Ann Ciona fetches $660; at Henry Singer a man's wool sweater by Ermenegildo Zegna costs about $200 and a Cerruti tie, $43. (All prices have been converted to United States dollars.) At Goodman Maneteau on the upper level, a high-fashion black leather, suede and patent-embossed coat by Linson goes for $715. At Harry Rosen's men's store on the second level, a navy cashmere blazer costs $355, while at the store's women's branch across the way a wool crepe suit by Samuelsohn is $450. At Abercrombie & Fitch, men's safari cloth pants are $98; jacket, $140. Rides  For families who want to try the trampolines, a haunted house and the small amusement rides, baby-sitting - for two-year-olds and up - is available for $1.25 for up to a total of four hours. Of the big attractions, Canada Fantasyland, with a ticket for about $11 for all ages, is the most expensive. But rides can also be paid for individually. The Drop of Doom, for instance, is $1.50. Admission to the World Waterpark is $7.50 and $6 for children, with the price for everyone dropping to $4.60 after 6:30 P.M. Guests at the Fantasyland Hotel can enter both Fantasyland and the Waterpark without charge, but they must pay for other attractions that have fees. The submarine ride is $5.75 and $3.60 for children, the Pebble Beach miniature golf is $3.60 a person and the skating rink charges $1. Where to Linger  In addition to many fast-food places, there is a variety of restaurants. Among those on Bourbon Street, where artificial stars flicker above a make-believe New Orleans, the Cafe Orleans serves shrimp creole, jambalaya, red beans and sausage on a combination plate for $5. Dinner for two with wine runs $25 to $29. Across Bourbon Street is the Pacific Fish Company, where fresh California swordfish, thresher shark and Hawaiian mahimahi cost about $11 and dinner for two with wine is around $43. Also on Bourbon Street is Zambelli's, a pizza and steak place where dinner for two with wine is about $20. The City  Downtown Edmonton is seven miles from the mall and a $4 round trip by bus. Attractions range from theater of various sorts, particularly the Citadel Theater's companies, to galleries and the domed Provincial Legislature. The many festivals include a couple of big rodeos. For those visiting Edmonton in July when the sun hardly sets, there is Klondike Days, celebrating the city's frontier past as well as its present position as ''Gateway to Canada's Arctic.'' The principal winter festival seems to be Edmonton Oilers hockey games, for which tickets are often available. Call 403-451-8000. Lodging and Dining  The Fantasyland Hotel at the mall (800-661-6454) charges $85 to $125 a night for two for its large theme rooms, which are fully booked on weekends through March. Rooms of the same size without themes but including Jacuzzi baths are about $68; the remaining rooms are around $47. One of the downtown hotels is the Four Seasons (10235 101st Street; 403-428-7111) where double rooms are $94 to $112, with special weekend rates of $54. The Westin (10135 100th Street; 403-426-3636) charges $75 and has weekend rates of $50 to $57. A special $50-a-night package available on Friday, Saturday and Sunday through Jan. 31 includes free parking and free shuttle service to the mall. At the new Ramada Renaissance (10155 105th Street; 403-423-4811), doubles range from $65 to $90, with weekend rates $40 to $47. For dining there is the Four Seasons Room (403-428-7111) at the Four Seasons Hotel. Dinner for two with wine: $60. Some specialties: medallion of veal stuffed with shrimp with cilantro sauce, $14.50; roast breast of duck with light raspberry sauce, $14.50. Port and Stilton are served after the meal. At Hy's Steak Loft (10013 101A Avenue; 403-424-4444), which features Alberta beef, dinner for two with wine is about $45. D. M.
