978|1987\01\04|The Tiber|To the Editor: I enjoyed Paul Hofmann's article on the Tiber River (Travel, Dec. 7). Livy in ''The Early History of Rome'' states that Cloelia, an unmarried girl, was a hostage of Lars Porsena held in the Etruscan lines, not far from the Tiber. Porsenna had withdrawn his troops from the Janiculum and evacuated Roman territory.|To the Editor: I enjoyed Paul Hofmann's article on the Tiber River (Travel, Dec. 7). Livy in ''The Early History of Rome'' states that Cloelia, an unmarried girl, was a hostage of Lars Porsena held in the Etruscan lines, not far from the Tiber. Porsenna had withdrawn his troops from the Janiculum and evacuated Roman territory. To the Editor: I enjoyed Paul Hofmann's article on the Tiber River (Travel, Dec. 7). Livy in ''The Early History of Rome'' states that Cloelia, an unmarried girl, was a hostage of Lars Porsena held in the Etruscan lines, not far from the Tiber. Porsenna had withdrawn his troops from the Janiculum and evacuated Roman territory. I do not think there is any evidence that he withdrew to Umbria. With a number of other girls, Cloelia eluded the guards, swam across the river under a hail of missiles and brought her company safely to Rome, where they were all restored to their families. Porsenna, furious, sent to Rome to demand Cloelia's return. Soon, his anger gave way to admiration of her more-than-masculine courage. He demanded her and said that the treaty he had made with the Romans would be broken if she were not returned. The Romans sent her back; Porsenna praised her publicly; friendly relations were restored, and the Romans paid tribute to Cloelia's courage, unprecedented in a woman, by an equally unprecedented honor: her statue on horseback on the Via Sacra. Perhaps Father Tiber, in its renovation, should be referred to as Mother Tiber, since women were recognized so early by the Romans.  RHODA M. SCHALL  New York  Paul Hofmann replies: Livy is the oldest literary source for the Cloelia story, but folklore has embroidered on it: Porsenna's son Aruna and the Roman general Horatius Cocles were in love with the girl, King Taruin intercepted her and the other hostages, etc. Plutarch offers two versions of the Cloelia episode, one suggesting that Porsenna gave her a horse, whence the statue on the Via Sacra showing her on horseback. Porsenna's headquarters was at Clusium (now the town of Chiusi) near the border between Tuscany and Umbria. Herodotus called the Etruscan territory ''Umbria.'' As for Father Tiber, the gender of the Latin name, Tiberius, is masculine; the river gods of the Tiber and the Nile were always represented as men in ancient statuary.
