979|1987\01\04|Buenos Aires|To the Editor: I read with great interest the article on Buenos Aires (Travel, Nov. 30) by Shirley Christian, and would like to add a few comments. You do not need to take a taxi from or to the airport (Ezeiza) and waste $25 or even $50 when there is bus service for roughly $4. It takes you to any major hotel in downtown Buenos Aires.|To the Editor: I read with great interest the article on Buenos Aires (Travel, Nov. 30) by Shirley Christian, and would like to add a few comments. You do not need to take a taxi from or to the airport (Ezeiza) and waste $25 or even $50 when there is bus service for roughly $4. It takes you to any major hotel in downtown Buenos Aires. To the Editor: I read with great interest the article on Buenos Aires (Travel, Nov. 30) by Shirley Christian, and would like to add a few comments. You do not need to take a taxi from or to the airport (Ezeiza) and waste $25 or even $50 when there is bus service for roughly $4. It takes you to any major hotel in downtown Buenos Aires. All you have to do is buy the ticket from the counter of the Manuel Tienda Leon S.A. Bus Service at the airport exit. The company has its downtown offices next to the Hotel Panamericano at 9 de Julio Avenue facing the obelisk, but they pick you up from any major downtown hotel. On the Recoleta there is not only the Gato Dumas Restaurant but at least a dozen other excellent restaurants where you do not need to spend $50. Brunch, nearby, at Don Juan Hippopotamus or Clark's ranges from $10 to $12. Also, Buenos Aires is one of the safest places in the world at any time. Taxis are indeed honest and cheap and plenty, and there is no city in the world that has as many taxis as Buenos Aires. All taxis are modern and clean and the drivers polite. If the tourist wants even cheaper transportation, try the subway system. It is old and cannot compare with Washington, Mexico City or Montreal, but the price is about a dime. Nowhere else in the world will you find such fast bus service, also for about a dime. Despite all the problems over the last 20 years, Buenos Aires is still one of the great places in the world. It is surprising that more North Americans have not discovered it.  O. CARLOS STOETZER  Wilton, Conn.  Shirley Christian replies: There is bus service from the airport to the city, costing between $4 and $5 a person, depending on the exchange rate. However, the operators say they do not drop people at hotels but at two downtown street locations or the close-in domestic airline terminal. It could be inconvenient for people with a lot of luggage.
