982|1987\01\04|ROMAN FLEA MARKET|Flea markets are flea markets the world over. There's the usual assortment of junk, kitsch, household goods and used clothing, but the regular vendors at Porta Portese -the ones you find week after week in more or less the same spots - are a show in themselves. Whenever I accompany people for the first time to Rome's Porta Portese flea market, a milelong sprawl of booths and makeshift tabletops that unfolds and refolds every Sunday morning like a pop-up storybook village, I always advise them to look at the sellers as much as the merchandise.|Flea markets are flea markets the world over. There's the usual assortment of junk, kitsch, household goods and used clothing, but the regular vendors at Porta Portese -the ones you find week after week in more or less the same spots - are a show in themselves. Whenever I accompany people for the first time to Rome's Porta Portese flea market, a milelong sprawl of booths and makeshift tabletops that unfolds and refolds every Sunday morning like a pop-up storybook village, I always advise them to look at the sellers as much as the merchandise. Flea markets are flea markets the world over. There's the usual assortment of junk, kitsch, household goods and used clothing, but the regular vendors at Porta Portese -the ones you find week after week in more or less the same spots - are a show in themselves. Whenever I accompany people for the first time to Rome's Porta Portese flea market, a milelong sprawl of booths and makeshift tabletops that unfolds and refolds every Sunday morning like a pop-up storybook village, I always advise them to look at the sellers as much as the merchandise. Take the two Neapolitan brothers who run a dish and glassware stand out of an old beat-up van. They drive up from Naples on Saturday night, sleep in the van and are up and in their spot on Sunday morning when the market opens around 6 A.M.. Gennaro, the older brother, works out of the side of the van, which, when lowered, reveals a kind of mobile showroom in which he is surrounded by boxes of wine glasses, stacks of pasta bowls and columns of dinner plates. His brother, on the ground below, does the wrapping and takes care of the money. The show begins when Gennaro, who wears around his neck a microphone muffled by a handkerchief, selects a set of 12 dinner plates and, without once interrupting a running commentary about their merits, starts to arrange the plates in the form of an open flower bud. With turns in each direction and a flourish or two, he completes the arrangement by using one of the plates as the base and the others as the petals of the flower. The climax to this modern commedia dell'arte vignette comes when - without blinking - Gennaro tosses the arrangement up into the air, and it lands intact in the outspread arms of his brother, who then squeezes the arrangement together like a deck of playing cards, wraps it in newspaper and hands it to an impressed and paying customer. It's a bravura performance that never fails to attract a crowd and just one of many you see at Porta Portese. Another of my favorite regulars at Porta Portese is a tiny, wrinkle-faced old woman whom many people affectionately call the Etruscan Lady. She's on the left at the top of the broad two-laned rise that constitutes the antiques and collectibles section of the flea market. She stands apart from the other vendors around her because, instead of having a booth or a counter, she displays her goods -a few pottery shards and some rusted bronze statuettes - on a square piece of cloth spread out over the ground. She'll tell you that her bits and pieces come from the ancient Etruscan tombs that dot the countryside outside Rome, and indeed some of them look like they could be thousands of years old. On close examination, however, it would seem more than likely that the Etruscan Lady is herself the oldest work of art on display. Everything else has a more recent history. The tourists and other customers either don't know this or don't care. A regular that anyone who has been to Porta Portese even once may recall seeing (or hearing) is an old man with a red cap and a long white beard who plays a few bars on a tiny, battered trumpet and then passes his cap. The vendors have given him the nickname Garibaldi because of the cap and the beard, which are trademarks of the Italian patriot of that name. Garibaldi's unexpected flourishes on the trumpet are so disharmonious that the vendors give him money to go away and not play in front of their booths, but I've never heard him play anything longer than five or six notes before the trumpet goes down and the cap comes off. In addition to the gypsies, who should be avoided no matter how exotic they seem, Porta Portese has some regular beggars who are neither pickpockets nor thieves, but are rather harmless and fun to watch. One of these is an old man who carries a chipped coffee cup and who begs only from women. Evidently he has learned over the years that males are harder to convince of the salutary effect of parting with their change. Among the amateur musicians usually found at flea markets seeking funding for their careers, Porta Portese has its own typical brand, made up of mandolin players, accordionists and flutists. But a personal favorite is the man who plays Neapolitan canzoni on a single flat laurel leaf he holds in place at his lips between the palms of his hands. It looks easy until you try it. Lately I've become friends with a man and his wife who run a porchetta sandwich stall at the end of the used shoes section (rows and rows of perfectly polished specimens). Porchetta is the traditional Porta Portese snack on which shoppers munch while browsing. It consists of slices of roast pork dressed with rosemary and stuffed into freshly baked rosette (rolls). The pork is sliced from the end of a whole roasted pig that lies at the end of the counter. My friends have been in the same spot for almost 2O years and recall, with great nostalgia, a different Porta Portese when there was less plastic and fewer good buys and more real bargains and sometimes even treasures to be found. Then, they say, you could find pieces of Galle glass, baroque gilded putti, Neapolitan creche figures and handpainted Sicilian cart pieces. Authentic examples of such items are becoming increasingly harder to find nowadays and, even when they do appear, they're snatched up almost immediately by the antique dealers or the earlycomers. (You can arrive late at Porta Portese - it closes at 1 P.M. - only if you are looking for furniture or marble because the vendors of these items are more likely to compromise on price than haul them home.) Not all the sellers at Porta Portese are Italian: a lot of them are foreigners made up of groups of Arabs selling carpets or blankets; Africans hawking wood sculptures or medicinal cures. But one group -Russian Jews - have become regulars and now have their own section of the flea market where they sell linen, caviar, binoculars and ballet slippers, along with handpainted lacquer boxes from Odessa and cigars from Havana. Originally these items were carried out in the suitcases of refugees on their way to homes in North America. Once that emigration stopped, the present vendors took up residence in Rome. It's always a bit startling to come upon this section and notice the shift in vowels from Italian to Russian and suddenly to see samovars and balalaikas. Bargaining at Porta Portese doesn't have to be a problem, as I learned from one of the regulars, a man who breeds passenger pigeons and walks around the market taking orders. Perched on his shoulder is Loredana, his pride and joy and a live example of the kind of results Mario can provide if you are so in need. When I asked Mario about bargaining, he advised me never to be afraid to try and not to worry about the language barrier because the vendors are used to foreigners and have their own ways of communicating. As Loredana pecked away at the buttons on his shirt, Mario gave me some step-by-step advice on how to proceed: ''First, cut the price any vendor asks for in half; then, move away a little bit, but not too far.'' With Loredana flapping about, he showed me how to do this. ''Then look at something else,'' he said, demonstrating the right kind of mock interest, ''and if the vendor still won't come down on the price, then you have only one thing left to try: Put the money in his hand,'' he said, stroking Loredana's back, ''They can't resist the feel of money.'' And that was just about the best advice I ever got from a regular (and his bird) at Porta Portese.
