984|1987\01\04|IT'S HOW YOU PLAY THE GAME|I COULDA been a contender.|I COULDA been a contender. I COULDA been a contender. Or so I used to think, whenever I watched a quiz show on television and knew the answer before the contestants. The money, cars, furs and press-on nails I've won as an armchair contestant over the years boggle the mind. I was never one for soap operas. I don't know who shot J.R. But give me a TV Guide full of quiz shows, and I can while away hours at a time. Not long ago, I finally got a chance to try the real thing. When a friend in Los Angeles offered me a place to stay, I was packed and on my way, faster than you can say ''Jeopardy.'' I left behind the racy novels I usually read when I fly cross-country. Instead, I spent five-and-a-half hours memorizing Trivial Pursuit questions. My strategy was all mapped out. I was going for the shows that relied on brainpower and that paid off in big bucks. No porcelain dalmations or Desserts of the Month for me, thanks. Of course, this plan was based on the naive assumption that I would get on the show of my choice. After all, if I were going all the way to California at my own expense, how could I be turned down?'' Easily. The competition for shows with cash prizes is formidable. When I called to book my tryouts, I was told that ''$25,000 Pyramid'' and ''Super Password'' both had month-long waiting lists. ''Jackpot'' was so backlogged it wasn't even scheduling tapings. So I settled for ''Card Sharks,'' ''Scrabble'' and ''Sale of the Century,'' figuring these would be less competitive. Wrong again. Anywhere from 150 to 200 people showed up for each tryout. And that was only the first step. Only about one out of every 115 people who try out for ''Sale of the Century'' actually gets on the show. The tryouts were held at the production companies, not the television studios, and lasted two to three hours. Each show has contestant coordinators, who are in charge of everything related to the contestants, including selection. The coordinators started out by having us introduce ourselves. Then they administered a test similar to the actual show. For example, at ''Card Sharks,'' we had to guess how many people responded yes or no to specific questions. Then we had to yell ''Higher! Higher!'' or ''Lower! Lower!'' the way they do on television. At ''Sale of the Century,'' we took a general knowledge test. Some answers I knew. Who wrote Moby Dick? (Herman Melville.) What did Elias Howe invent that helped home workers? (The sewing machine.) Some I guessed at. What are seraphim? (Angels.) Who wrote the Aneneid? (Virgil.) Where is the Bridge of Sighs? (I'm still not sure, but I think it's Venice.) And some I got wrong. Where is the vitreous humor? (The eye.) What state has two peninsulas connected by the Mackinaw Bridge? (Michigan.) My father couldn't understand why the questions were so hard. ''Why do you have to be so smart,'' he wanted to know, ''if all you do is dress up like a chicken and pick a door?'' ''No, no, Dad,'' I explained. ''It's 'Sale of the Century,' not 'Let's Make A Deal.' '' Next came the personality test. It meant giving our life histories in 30 seconds, without mentioning sex, politics or religion. If we weren't sure what to do, we could ask the people sitting near us. Many had been through tryouts before. One woman was using her whole vacation for tryouts. She was with a friend who had won a motorcycle on ''Wheel of Fortune,'' or ''Wheel of Misfortune,'' as the contestant coordinators called it. Another had a two-page schedule of all the Los Angeles-based tryouts, and intended to hit them all. Most of the people trying out lived in Southern California, but there were people in my group from New York, Kentucky and Alabama. I met students, retirees, a teacher of religion, a track official, a serviceman, a chemist who was playing hooky from an international conference in Anaheim and a husband-and-wife team. (They assumed that if one spouse wasn't selected, the other would be.) One man was there because he had bet his son that if he didn't lose 25 pounds in three months, he would try out. Along with 25 others, I survived the cuts for ''Sale of the Century,'' and was invited back the next morning for a callback. The callback has two parts - three, if I count staying up all night worrying about the other two. First, we had to tell some funny stories about ourselves that Jim Perry, the show host, could use to introduce us. We were primed by the contestant coordinators: ''Project your voice.'' ''Make eye contact.'' ''Sit still.'' (We were in swivel chairs.) And one more thing: ''Use Jim's name. 'Yes, Jim.' 'That's right, Jim.' He likes that.'' From then until my taping, I practiced by calling my husband ''Jim.'' Then we ran through the game. The pressure was on: people failed the run-through if they couldn't answer any questions before the other contestants or if they weren't enthusiastic enough. Two people failed because they answered a question with a question. (''This is not 'Jeopardy,' '' we were reminded more than once.) Only eight of us managed to get through the callback. Men had an advantage, as fewer of them tried out and the contestant coordinators wanted both sexes to be equally represented. People in the armed services had a good chance, as long as they were in uniform. So did out-of-towners, especially those with unusual accents. The instructions we received regarding our taping seemed endless. Besides remembering to smile, project our voices and call Jim by name, we also had to bring our Social Security cards and five changes of clothes to the studio. Five shows were taped each day, and after each show, the winner was supposed to change into another outfit so the next taping would seem like a new day. Women had to wear solid-colored skirts and blouses or dresses - no pants. No prints. No denim. No white, yellow, beige or black, except for one black skirt. The day of my taping dawned, but that's about all. It was cold. Worse, it was raining. When it rains in Los Angeles, traffic stops. The only way to distinguish the Los Angeles freeways from the Long Island Expressway during rush hour is that Los Angeles drivers all have phones in their cars. I finally made it to the studio, where the NBC Compliance and Practice staff collected our Social Security cards and gave us more instructions: No talking to ''anyone or anything,'' except the other contestants and the contestant coordinators. Our guests were kept far away from us, just in case they might have seen or heard something that could help us. We signed numerous releases, swearing that we met all eligibility requirements, that we understood our winnings would not be sent until 90 days after our tapes aired, and that we would pay any required taxes on our winnings (that's why they wanted our Social Security numbers). I think somewhere in there I also promised them my BMW. Finally, our big moment arrived, and we were escorted into the studio. It sure didn't look the way I thought national television would. The studio was much smaller than I'd expected, with a big hole in the carpet that was patched while we waited. And one look made it clear why we'd been told in the run-through not to swivel in our chairs. The contestants' chairs were close to the edge of the platform. If we rolled back too far, we would fall off. I could give you all sorts of reasons why I didn't win: I am a leftie and the buzzers were on the contestants' right; I was assigned the middle seat and no one in the middle seat ever seems to win. But the real reason I lost was that I was too distracted by everything else going on in the studio to pay much attention to the game. Prizes were being positioned. Cue cards were being set up. The crew was priming the audience. I followed it all, and at times forgot I was supposed to be participating in the show, not just watching it! When I finally did buzz in, it was a disaster. The answer was ''shark.'' I have a Boston accent, so the answer came out ''shaaak.'' Jim Perry couldn't understand me, and I had to keep repeating it. I only led once during the show, but it was at the best time - when the player in the lead gets to try for the jackpot. That day it was $9,000. I had to pick which of three boxes the money was in (the other two had $100 bills). Naturally, I picked the wrong one. I came in second. I won $144, press-on nails, diet breakfast food, the ''Sale of the Century'' home game and other miscellaneous items that I'll receive in 90 days. I didn't even get lunch. Was the experience worth the more than $1,000 I spent on airfare, car rentals and eating out every night? I think so. The story makes great dinner conversation and my friends are all extremely jealous of my press-on nails. My husband says he would have paid even more just to get me to stop talking about going on a game show. He doesn't know it yet, but I'm thinking about trying out again next year. I watched a show the other day, and the winner was so slow to hit the buzzer that I kept thinking, ''I coulda been a contender...'' By the way, just in case you're ever on a game show and they ask: ''I coulda been a contender'' comes from the movie ''On The Waterfront.'' Marlon Brando said it. WESTCHESTER OPINION
