985|1987\01\04|STORM WARNING: ON THE HOME FRONT|WITH the season for blizzards just around the corner, it's time to take stock and prepare for the worst. Last year, after almost 24 hours of dire warnings, all a cautious mother would learn from the television commentators was to lay in a supply of batteries, bottled water and masking tape. Frankly, that wouldn't get you through the first 15 minutes in a real storm if you had kids.|WITH the season for blizzards just around the corner, it's time to take stock and prepare for the worst. Last year, after almost 24 hours of dire warnings, all a cautious mother would learn from the television commentators was to lay in a supply of batteries, bottled water and masking tape. Frankly, that wouldn't get you through the first 15 minutes in a real storm if you had kids. WITH the season for blizzards just around the corner, it's time to take stock and prepare for the worst. Last year, after almost 24 hours of dire warnings, all a cautious mother would learn from the television commentators was to lay in a supply of batteries, bottled water and masking tape. Frankly, that wouldn't get you through the first 15 minutes in a real storm if you had kids. Let's be honest, batteries are good either to make toy robots whir forever, or to make flashlights work so you can play coal miner. The best that bottled water will get you is a full water pistol. Masking tape, however, may come in handy if you finally decide to tape hands, feet and even little mouths after a full day in the house. In any case, in anticipation of a winter full of storms, any household with children should consider stocking the ''real'' necessities. To begin, at the first hint of a storm, assume school will close, thus assuring that the storm will go elsewhere. This means that the kids will be home all day with nothing to do, but you can't let them outside because the storm might hit. Entertainment is up to you. Therefore, first purchase a supply of important foodstuffs. Discount all suggestions of canned goods. Your children don't eat canned peas when there isn't a storm; they're certainly not going to eat them now. Do not buy any frozen dinners. If the microwave isn't working there is nothing worse than a frozen enchilada. Crunchy, possibly nutritious, but incredibly depressing. Do be sure and lay in a supply of soda, potato chips and cookies. To justify these purchases, remember that these foodstuffs do not have to be cooked, warm soda (should ice be unavailable) offends no one, and this type of food cuts down on the arguments about why there is never anything good to eat in the house. Put your guilt to rest by buying some fruit or sunflower seeds to munch on between serious snacks. I, personally, also suggest a supply of chocolate chips. Baking is a diversion for the children in between game shows and cartoons. While the kids may or may not help you cook, they most certainly will eat. Further, should all power go off, chocolate chips by the handful aren't a bad snack (for you or the kids). Remember, space your activities well. During one storm, I made the fatal mistake of baking cookies at 9:30 in the morning. That meant that by 10 in the morning we had already used up one of our best ''pass the time'' activities; the kids were well on their way to a sugar high and it seemed pointless to suggest that 10 in the morning was a tad early for soda. Which leads to the next point. At these times it's never too early for a snack. Overeating may possibly lead to naps - a welcome relief. Next, secretly buy a tape for your VCR - one with absolutely no redeeming educational value and that your kids have always wanted to rent. Hide it and save it for a rainy/snowy day. No need to point out that in the snow belt you need a VCR as a basic survival tool. Do not count on cable television to meet your programming needs. Cable transmission goes out when the sun is shining and the temperature is in the 90's. You can't count on the standard broadcasting networks either. Clearly members of the weathermen's union see storms, or even better anticipate storms, as their golden opportunity for stardom. All programming is permanently interrupted as meterologists compete to dazzle the audience with unintelligible gibberish about warm air masses that are about to dump 20 inches of snow either on my house or the Atlantic Ocean, whichever comes first. Scarcely the type of entertainment to prevent fratricidal homicide. Do not forget to buy a surge protector for the computer. Should the power go out in the middle of ''Pac Man,'' at least you won't lose thousands of dollars worth of equipment or software. This is no time for quibbling over how many hours a child can play computer games before his eyes glaze, his hand becomes permanently attached to the joystick and all brain cells atrophy. Lastly, try and make the storm work for you. The day before one storm, my first-grader came home with the news that his homework for the night was to prepare for a natural disaster. He was told by his teacher to be sure and clean up the backyard and bring in all the toys. Was it wrong of me that I suggested that hurricanes, tornadoes and blizzards were drawn inexorably to messy rooms? The list of essentials might get you through the first six hours of calamitous weather. By that point, one hopes, there are either snow drifts or puddles that the kids can attack. In any case it is clear that whoever wrote the lyrics ''the weather outside is frightful, but in here it's so delightful, let it snow, let it snow,'' did not have children at home. WESTCHESTER OPINION
