986|1987\01\04|WINTER ELEGY FOR A GARDEN LOST TO MARAUDERS|MY magical garden, my little slice of paradise, lay plundered and desecrated. Rising above the weeds various enough to fill a botanist's volume, on discarded broomsticks and rotted tomato stakes, hung sacks of human hair. My Eden had become a voodoo island.|MY magical garden, my little slice of paradise, lay plundered and desecrated. Rising above the weeds various enough to fill a botanist's volume, on discarded broomsticks and rotted tomato stakes, hung sacks of human hair. My Eden had become a voodoo island. MY magical garden, my little slice of paradise, lay plundered and desecrated. Rising above the weeds various enough to fill a botanist's volume, on discarded broomsticks and rotted tomato stakes, hung sacks of human hair. My Eden had become a voodoo island. Surrounding these gruesome totems were the remains of once-joyful effort - chomped-off tomato and cucumber plants, zinnias, black-eyed susans, gloriosa daisies and sunflowers, squash and pumpkin vines. All that had survived unscathed - as in comic relief - was an abundance of garlic plants, which recently stood with their goose-like heads filled with next year's tiny seeds. Hundreds of these morsels were sniffed and ignored by the marauder. This all stemmed from the day I read in a major English-language daily that hanging bags of human hair, preferably unwashed, would deter foraging deer. Having, the previous season, dispatched by stealth, cunning and explosives a resident woodchuck, and having seen earlier this year a deer the size of a Russian tank blithely nibbling my strawberries and perennials, I took swift action. Feeling I was slipping into an event almost Biblical in its mood and significance, I went before my mirror, reached for a plastic gadget fitted with a razor blade and sheared off most of my hair. Those who know me and my limited supply were moved either to awe or laughter by the sacrifice. When the task was done, I looked more like an extremely old Boy Scout about to leave for summer camp than a fairly young writer, but I had my sack of hair. I rushed down to the garden and tied it to a cage supporting a crop of promising green tomatoes. The next evening upon arriving home from the city - after accepting in rather excellent humor, I felt, a day of mean-spirited tonsorial comment - I returned to the garden. A giant bite had been taken out of the most mature tomato and a good portion of one entire plant had been ripped from the main stem. Obviously, the situation called for more hair. The first chance I had, I rounded up my three young children and headed for Mr. Gino. Mr. Gino is a gentleman of skill, patience and tact, but when I told him why the children were getting haircuts, all he could manage was a meek grin to mask his disbelief. ''Ah, I hear that works sometimes for the deer,'' he said. I also caught him staring at my head when he thought I wasn't looking. When the three heads were shorn, Mr. Gino began sweeping up, but when he aimed his broom under the other barber's chair I protested. ''No, no, this is my family only against the deer.'' He dumped our ammunition in a brown supermarket bag and we returned home loaded. The hair totems went up wherever I had cultivated our series of raised beds. As I later announced to three thoroughly befuddled children, ''You have witnessed a hair-raising event.'' Weeks went by. At first, it seemed, what I had begun to call ''the damned Bambi'' was discouraged. But ultimately it became bolder than ever. In four or five weeks, Bambi and perhaps accomplices had laid waste to every precious growing thing save the garlics. But, just a minute. Maybe I had aimed at the wrong prey, had falsely accused these gentle and lovable animals. I called in my friend Joe Stahl, who manages the huge Hudson Pines Farm for the Rockefeller family in Pocantico Hills. Joe and I walked among my weed collection - all effort at farming since abandoned -while his children and mine hung back and our wives waited on the terrace. Joe held a few remnants of plants and flowers in his hands, brushed the occasional still-bare spot of soil with his shoe, stood upright and peered around at the woods. ''Don't see deer tracks, but that's because the soil's so dry now,'' he said. ''It's definitely deer. Look how high they've eaten on the plant. Nothing else does that.'' Joe Stahl went on to reveal that deer had eaten a sizable part of the corn crop intended to feed the Hudson Pines cattle herd, and as he spoke I saw, growing close to the groud, a curious-looking dark weed I'd never spotted before. I reached down to examine it. It wasn't a weed. The deer had helped itself to a mouthful of my hair hanging in one of the sacks and then had spit it out. At dinner that night, the children, who had been curious if not always sympathetic witnesses as my dismay about the deer grew to despair, brought up the subject directly for the first time. ''Daddy,'' asked the youngest, ''who is this 'damned Bambi' you're always talking about?'' ''That's not a fit subject for the table, Sweetheart,'' I told her. ''Bambi was a very unpleasant critter, just like the one in our garden. As I recall, someone sold her story to Hollywood and they cleaned up her act for the movies.''  WESTCHESTER OPINION
