988|1987\01\04|COVERING RISK ON THE SLOPE|The Europeans seem to have come up with an emergency rescue card without which one should never put foot to ski boot. It is Carte Neige, or Snow Card, and advertisements prominently posted around the French Alpine ski resort of Courchevel last season touted it as the best thing since chairlifts.|The Europeans seem to have come up with an emergency rescue card without which one should never put foot to ski boot. It is Carte Neige, or Snow Card, and advertisements prominently posted around the French Alpine ski resort of Courchevel last season touted it as the best thing since chairlifts. The Europeans seem to have come up with an emergency rescue card without which one should never put foot to ski boot. It is Carte Neige, or Snow Card, and advertisements prominently posted around the French Alpine ski resort of Courchevel last season touted it as the best thing since chairlifts. The card covers the cost of searching for and rescuing an injured skier (up to about $1,000 to $3,000 an occurrence, depending on where the accident occurred and how extensive the rescue operation was), then transporting the skier to a medical clinic, hospital or home (up to about $900 an occurrence). It also pays for emergency medical treatment (up to about $800), for the forfeiture of lift ticket and ski school pass and for legal defense if the skier is sued for property damage or for injury to other skiers. Its brochure says Carte Neige will even pay for transporting the insured's body to a mortuary in the event of a fatality. The coverage is not limited to ski resorts in France; it extends worldwide, according to the brochure. And, a spokesman said, it covers all mountain sports except activities like parasailing. For all this, the individual vacationer pays about $20 for the season beginning and ending Nov. 15, or about $15 for an eight-day vacation. A family of four can buy coverage for about $65 for the season. Carte Neige is available through the French Ski Federation (La Federation Francaise de Ski), at French travel agencies and at ski schools. For more information, one can call the ski club in Annecy (50.51.40.34) or Carte Neige headquarters in Paris (45.72.64.40). Skiers as well as professionals knowledgeable about medical insurance said they knew of no coverage offered in the United States similar to Carte Neige. In any event, the American skier headed for slopes abroad should consider how Carte Neige might duplicate medical insurance coverage he or she already has or could get with a travel insurance policy. A member of a health maintenance organization like Health Insurance Plan of Manhattan, for example, would have to bring back all itemized bills showing diagnosis, date of service and date of charge and then could expect to be reimbursed for all ''reasonable and customary'' doctors' charges, hospital charges in full and other charges directly related to the injury. But would this include, for example, the ski patrol's charge for search, rescue and transportation off the slopes? ''That's a gray area,'' a HIP spokesman said. And how long might the skier wait for a claim to be processed and for a reimbursement check to arrive in the mail? A minimum of six to eight weeks. A subscriber of Blue Cross-Blue Shield who has basic coverage would be required to bring back all itemized bills and ''have them put into English and American money,'' a spokesman said. Most physician and hospital charges would be reimbursed in full, but the basic policy would not cover any transportation charges, she added. And the claimant would wait at least 21 working days for reimbursement. The HIP and Blue Cross clients, of course, would pay nothing extra for this coverage, but neither would they be gaining such Carte Neige benefits as legal-defense insurance and reimbursement for the unused lift ticket. The initial reaction of Americans on their first ski trip to Europe might be: Is this a good deal? Is Carte Neige even necessary? The answers require a comparison of, well, les pommes et l'oranges. It helps to compare some basic fiscal, philosophical and jurisprudential differences between French and American ski resorts: * In France, an injured skier requiring rescue by the ski patrol is charged a fee ($85 to $150, or more if a helicopter is required) that must be paid on the spot unless one is covered by Carte Neige or similar medical insurance programs available in France; thus the ski patrol is a service that, in effect, helps pay for itself. In the United States, there is no charge for rescue or transport by the ski patrol, unless one considers that the cost of this service is, in effect, included in the price of the lift ticket, so all skiers actually pay for it whether they need it or not. On the other hand, some Americans would argue that, relative to French resorts, United States resorts provide far more amenities for the skier's dollar and the ski patrol is one such amenity. * In France, ski patrols are staffed by professionally trained, state-tested and state-regulated emergency medical technicians who are paid by the resort operators. In the United States, ski patrols operate under very little governmental regulation; although most major resorts are moving toward all-professional patrols, a spokesman for the National Ski Patrol System acknowledged that most ski patrolers nationwide are volunteers who are usually paid with free season ski passes and must heed only those training requirements established by the resort managers. * In the United States, the cost of liability insurance has helped push up lift ticket prices and threatened to close some ski resorts. Paul Parot, director of skiing services at Killington, Vt., said ''one of our main reasons for going pro'' in ski patrol services was the liability insurance issue. In France, this seems to be a nonissue, mostly because of differences in the legal system that result in far fewer lawsuits for damages. Carte Neige's basic coverage could also be approximated in a travel insurance policy. Mutual of Omaha, for example, sells four types of travel accident insurance; a policy for eight days' duration that pays $15,000 for loss of life, limb or sight, $1,500 accident medical expense benefits and $150 monthly in the event of total disability would cost $3.08. It would not pay the ski patrol's rescue charge, but a separate trip cancellation policy would cover emergency transportation to the nearest medical facility if you had to interrupt your vacation because of covered illness or injuries. That would cost $30.40 for $800 worth of coverage. The two policies together would thus cost $33.48. After so many apples and oranges, the skier is likely to be a bit dazed by the options available, much in the way of someone shopping for the best buy among video cassette recorders. An American skier in Europe probably ought to consider buying the eight-day Carte Neige; its $15 cost would be well worth it if only for the rescue service that would otherwise cost $85 and might not be reimbursed. But, then, the ski patrolers at Courchevel boast that the huge resort records only 350 injuries among the more than 1.5 million skiers who use it each season. Such a figure is hard to verify, given the ski patrols' differences in definition and recordkeeping, but if it is true it is only about one-tenth the average rate of injury reported by American resorts. Philippe Mermin, a Courchevel ski patroler for 15 years, attributed this record to the well-staffed operation of the resort, to the grooming that the trails are given year round, to the European skiers' penchant for instruction and safe skiing and to the Europeans' less litigious nature. Interviewed atop La Saulire, one of the highest peaks at Courchevel, one very foggy morning, Mr. Mermin said - and an officer of the company later confirmed - that Service Public des Trois Vallees, the owner and operator of Courchevel, had been sued only once in 20 years. The plaintiff, a man who had been injured while skiing, lost his case.
