989|1987\01\04|LET ME BE A MOTHER IN MY OWN WAY|WHEN I was about four months' pregnant, people began asking me about my plans.|WHEN I was about four months' pregnant, people began asking me about my plans. WHEN I was about four months' pregnant, people began asking me about my plans. Several times a day, apparently well-meaning people would ask, ''So, how soon are you going back to work?'' This question was asked not only by colleagues, but also by friends, acquaintances and even the unknown woman-on-the-street. And that question used to drive me around the bend. There was only a slight rounding of my belly. I hadn't yet heard my baby's heartbeat. I wanted to know that everything was all right. I wanted it to sink in - I'm going to be a parent -my life is changed forever. I wanted to think about tiny T-shirts, warm pajama stretchies and microscopic finger nails. I was scared. I was thrilled. A baby! ''It's the same as any other company disability,'' the woman who ran the company health care program told me. ''Six weeks' unpaid leave.'' She went on to tell me that I could take the six weeks anytime, but that most women preferred to have the maximum time with the baby, and to work ''right until the end.'' Soon after this discussion I began to compare notes with other pregnant women on the job. ''My goal,'' one television producer said, ''is to go into labor while I'm on location, and to be back at work within two weeks.'' ''This pregnancy is going to interfere as little as possible with my life,'' a stockbroker said. There seemed to be a whole new machisma afoot about pregnancy and childbirth. And I found it very threatening. I did not want to work until ''the very end,'' which, I now realize, should have been described as ''the very beginning.'' I did not want to ''keep my mind off it'' as was suggested. Rather, I really wanted to savor it, with warmth and anticipation. Those were the sweet feelings. There were others. Like fear, nausea, dizziness and swollen ankles. I wanted to put my feet up. And it seemed that the new machisma did not only extend to mental restraint; physical fortitude was also de rigueur. This, of course, included, and in a sense was culminated in, the prevalent attitude toward childbirth itself. The questions about where I was taking my Lamaze or Bradley Painless Childbirth classes were soon forthcoming. When I answered that natural childbirth was not for me (any more than natural appendectomies were) people would react as if I wanted my unborn child to come in to this world in a coma and slip away soon thereafter. ''I think natural childbirth is fine for women who want to try it,'' I would protest weakly. ''I just don't believe in gratuitous pain. I like pain killers. I've always liked pain killers. I wouldn't do anything to hurt the baby. I'm just talking about some local anesthesia.. . .'' At best, contemporaries counseled you to try not to feel gulty if, after 22 hours of labor, you ''broke down'' and asked for an epidural block. Given that my idea of breaking down was begging my obstetrician (no doubt in vain) for general anesthesia, I felt quite out of step with the times. Again, the disapproval was pronounced. I quit my job in my eighth month. I did not take a leave; I just quit. For the next month my phone would ring and it would be former colleagues. When I answered the phone ''Hello?'' they would respond with: ''Are you still around? Hasn't that baby come yet?'' I felt inclined to explain that biologically, the leaving of the job and the start of labor are not connected; and that one could loll about the house for months - even years - without a baby coming. Finally, the baby did come. For a few weeks I was treated like a new mommy. Flowers arrived, with congratulations, and - oh joy - dozens of tiny T-shirts and snugly warm pajama stretchies. But no sooner were my daughter and I settled into our new routine (if life with a newborn can be called routine) when advice began to pour in. I'm not talking about the older ladies on the street who scolded me that the baby should have her head covered in this weather. I mean being told that a comparative analysis of the benefits of Huggies, Luvs and Pampers was not a sufficient use of my master's degree. And that there was this great center where they were really loving that took babies at six weeks. And about the wonderful woman who took care of infants just three blocks from my house. Much of this was apparently in concern for my mental well-being. ''Are you going crazy?'' ''Aren't you bored?'' And my favorite, from a woman who obviously had no kids, ''What do you do all day? It must be marvelous to have time to actually read a book!'' Attitudes toward pregnancy and child rearing seemed to have taken a 180-degree turn. Once, as soon as a woman began to show, it was considered bad taste to be seen in public. Once, and not very long ago, a mother who worked outside her home was considered to be selfishly neglecting her children - no matter how great her financial need. But today, if you don't go from the office to the Jane Fonda pregnancy work-out class in your ninth month, you are made to feel somehow like a failure. If controlled breathing doesn't get you through the ordeal of childbirth, you're a wimp. And if you're home raising your child, (a job with no days off, no sick leave, in which you are on call all night long, to a very small boss who is almost impossible to reason with) then you are slacking off, taking it easy and someday, one assumes, you'll finally get back to work. Women's liberation was supposed to be about choices. Much of the time, these choices, with their competing emotional and financial needs, pull and tear us in different directions. None of our chosen paths are without their trade-offs. Whether a mother is staying at home, working outside the home, or trying to find some workable combination, she will certainly have her share of frazzled days and ambivalent feelings. But exchanging one set of stereotypes about the ''right'' way to be pregnant and the ''right'' way to be a mother with a new set is not the answer. Forced to suppress our own doubts and insecurities about our chosen paths, we then become righteous whether we are mothers at home or mothers with careers. Inevitably, we turn on each other, and that doesn't do any of us any good. Machisma is new and tough. But sisterhood has been around a long time. And it's powerful. CONNECTICUT OPINION
