990|1987\01\04|SOME RESTAURANT RESOLUTIONS|THE first week of each New Year allows us to indulge our hopes, intentions and fantasies. Keeping all of these elements in mind, we have compiled a number of resolutions for 1987. To wit:|THE first week of each New Year allows us to indulge our hopes, intentions and fantasies. Keeping all of these elements in mind, we have compiled a number of resolutions for 1987. To wit: THE first week of each New Year allows us to indulge our hopes, intentions and fantasies. Keeping all of these elements in mind, we have compiled a number of resolutions for 1987. To wit: To eschew blackened redfish, reddened blackfish, incinerated mystery fish and other ''Cajun'' catastrophes until this much-abused, badly adapted cuisine returns to its natural habitat, New Orleans, and to Paul Prudhomme, who knows how to prepare his native Cajun dishes properly. To brace oneself for the next wave of food fads -Southwest, Middle East, Middle West, Thai, Muong, Uzbek, Bahian, Burmese or whatever -and enjoy the best of them, until they, too, disappear into the abyss of yesterday's fads. The next time we hear ''Hi, my name is Bruce/ Brunhilde/George/Georgette and I'll be your waiter/waitress tonight,'' we promise to respond, ''Hi, I'm Martha (name chosen to preserve critic's anonymity), and this is Ted, Ed, Greg, Peg and Meg, and we're your table guests tonight.'' This response, if observed by every diner tired of the pseudo-friendly, informal approach practiced in so many restaurants these days, might go a long way toward ending this dubious custom. The next time a waiter asks, ''Is everything all right?'' to tell him if it isn't - politely, of course. As part of the same resolution, we promise to return hot soup served cool, chilled soup served at room temperature, meat over- or undercooked, desserts stale and overage. It is our view that a good restaurant appreciates feedback if something is amiss. Most diners ''vote with their feet'' by not returning to a restaurant whose performance is flawed. We think it more responsible to let the establishment know what is wrong so that it can correct it. When a waiter or busboy begins clearing our plate while other diners at our table are still consuming their course, we pledge to ask him to wait until everyone is finished. This cavalier treatment may make it easier and faster for the staff cleanup, but it rushes diners and destroys the possibility of enjoyable, relaxed dining. Equally offensive is the bad timing in some restaurants whereby entrees are plopped on the table while diners are still polishing off their appetizers. Such amateur practices should be rejected by caring diners. After all, professional service is part of what we pay for when we dine out. To ignore all daily specials cited by the waiter if the verbal recitation consists of more than than one appetizer, one entree and one dessert. Restaurant managements must be made to realize that most patrons' memories are not designed for total recall, nor are all waiters/waitresses competent to provide the lengthy litanies. Suggested rule-of- thumb: If the number of specials exceeds two or three items, they should be handwritten or photocopied and supplied to each table, European-style, with prices duly noted. If the price is not quoted, the diner may be in for a disagreeable surprise when the check arrives. Yet reciting the price often seems tacky. A written list of specials solves the price problem, as well. To be grateful for menu simplicity and skeptical of all that describe specific dishes in True Confessions language, such as ''lovingly garnished with tender, emerald-hued, fresh basil hand-plucked from our own gardens'' or ''gently caressed with a dollop of sweet cream, whipped into peaks by chef Louis himself.'' To request a smoking or nonsmoking section when making a reservation by telephone. If more patrons paid attention, perhaps more restaurants with seating capacities that exceed 75 would obey the law and provide designated sections as required. The flagrant disregard of this law by many Connecticut restaurants should be a matter of public concern. It soon would be, if more of us made our preferences and protests known. When dining out personally, not professionally, we resolve to avoid restaurants that refuse to take reservations, a noticeable and disagreeable trend in many new places. This strikes us as a managerial decision that is contemptuous of patrons and nullifies attempts at gracious dining. An hourlong wait dissipates some of the fun of dining out. The no-reservations policy also smacks of greed: If you can herd waiting diners into the bar, it guarantees a higher volume of bar business. Never mind that by the time many diners totter to their restaurant table, they may be in no condition to enjoy any subtlety in the cuisine. Could that be part of the motive? If the diners have had several drinks, they are bound to be less discerning about what they eat. To reward exemplary service, not just in the tip, but with complimentary words as well, both to the server and to the maitre d'hotel. Good service includes remembering which diner ordered which dish. It can be annoying to have plates dealt like cards by waiters who either do not care or can not seem to keep track of who ordered what. A course in memory training may not be part of the job description, but we have noticed good servers develop their own techniques for keeping track of who ordered what, no matter how large the party or how varied the menu choices. Not making the effort suggests an indifference to the job and the patrons. To give special thanks in advance to restaurants that care enough about patrons who consider tea bags an affront to gracious dining to offer brewed tea. It is aggravating to us diehards that even some of the finest restaurants, establishments that would blanch at the idea of offering instant coffee, brandish the ubiquitous tea bag shamelessly. To keep in perspective the experiences that might make one a culinary curmudgeon, and enjoy the variety and pleasures that dining out in Connecticut hopefully will yield in 1987. DINING OUT
