993|1987\01\04|ONCE UPON A TIME -- AT THE MOVIES|''WHAT, again?'' my mother used to exclaim. ''You went last week. You'll grow up stupid!''|''WHAT, again?'' my mother used to exclaim. ''You went last week. You'll grow up stupid!'' ''WHAT, again?'' my mother used to exclaim. ''You went last week. You'll grow up stupid!'' It was a weekly argument my mother and I had when I grew up in the 1940's in the Five Towns. The argument was whether I was to be permitted to join my friends at the Cedarhurst Movie Theater, the only movie house in all of the Five Towns. (I read recently that the theater has been converted into a shopping center - a little bit of news that released this flood of memories.) ''That movie house is a baby sitter for all the parents who want to get rid of their kids on Saturday,'' my mother used to protest while I silently prayed, ''Why can't my parents be like other parents?'' The only way I would get to the theater, I knew, was to convince my mother how educational the movies were. Consequently I would prepare arguments as to what ''Tarzan,'' ''The Thin Man,'' ''Love Crazy'' or ''Casablanca'' had to offer an 11- or 12-year-old girl. Getting permission, however, was the least of my problems. One had to have a ''date'' with a girlfriend. The one you went to the movie with determined your popularity. These dates were arranged no more than two days in advance. Sometimes if there was an important football game in our small private school, the Woodmere Academy, we would opt to go to the football game rather than the movies. However, if it rained unexpectedly, ''dates'' had to be arranged hurriedly in the morning. During the 40's most people had only one phone number, and the stock market used to stay open on Saturdays until noon. That meant I had to make my calls quickly while my father groaned that he could not even call his broker on the one day he had time to talk to him. The ''date'' started with lunch at one or the other's house, and one parent driving us to the movie. We would spot our friends from school and stand in line with them. Out of the corner of our eyes we would notice, too, if any of the boys we knew had come to the movies. I was very much influenced by the movies, and perhaps that is what my mother disapproved of. Sometimes I wore my hair over one eye like Veronica Lake; other times I tried an upsweep. I bought all the movie magazines and after reading all the gossip about my idols cut out the pictures and pasted them in a scrapbook. In private I wrote preposterous short stories to be sent to Hollywood. Years later, re-reading these efforts, I recognized rehashed plots of my favorite movies. Much, much later, when our marriage was breaking up, the marriage counselor said, ''We want to keep in mind that your generation was influenced by those romantic movies where all was glamour and perfect love.'' My first love was Gregory Peck. He was - for a young girl - a safe love up there on the screen. Of course, I was dreaming about the future -what was possible once I got out of the Five Towns. Because the Five Towns had no other entertainment than the Cedarhurst Movie Theater, it was our only release from the weekly routine of homework, gym and home. It made us laugh, cry, cheer and at times gave us nightmares. It assured us that romance was around the corner and that the good guys always win, and reminded us that even though our lives were tranquil, the world was at war. Perhaps it is only right that if the theater had to go, it should be converted into a shopping center. Don't we in a sense shop to project our dream of how we would like to see ourselves? But I have another dream - a wish as unrealistic as the movies we used to watch. I hope that at night, when they lock up the shopping center, Gregory Peck, Hedy Lamarr, Richard Conte, Veronica Lake, Cary Grant and all the rest with their wonderful romantic stories come right through the walls to haunt the place. CONNECTICUT OPINION
