997|1987\01\04|PRESERVING THE ISLAND'S 'SENSE OF PLACE'|It seems that whenever the issue of land preservation - particularly that of the pine barrens - comes up, Jack Kulka, the developer, is there to lambast those foresighted individuals who wish to preserve what little remains of Long Island's natural (and fragile) environment. In this case, his opposition is to a law that, if enacted, will broaden Suffolk County's power of review over building projects in our pine barrens  [ ''New Dispute on Pine Barrens,'' Dec.|It seems that whenever the issue of land preservation - particularly that of the pine barrens - comes up, Jack Kulka, the developer, is there to lambast those foresighted individuals who wish to preserve what little remains of Long Island's natural (and fragile) environment. In this case, his opposition is to a law that, if enacted, will broaden Suffolk County's power of review over building projects in our pine barrens  [ ''New Dispute on Pine Barrens,'' Dec. It seems that whenever the issue of land preservation - particularly that of the pine barrens - comes up, Jack Kulka, the developer, is there to lambast those foresighted individuals who wish to preserve what little remains of Long Island's natural (and fragile) environment. In this case, his opposition is to a law that, if enacted, will broaden Suffolk County's power of review over building projects in our pine barrens  [ ''New Dispute on Pine Barrens,'' Dec. 14 ] . Obviously, Mr. Kulka has his own interests at stake, not those of the people of Long Island. Despite restrictions, Long Island has experienced unprecedented ''growth'' during the last five years (can you imagine the destruction that would have occurred without these restrictions?) and a corresponding decrease in the quality of certain facets of life. Among these are deteriorating traffic flow (currently Mr. Kulka is working on plans to alleviate congestion along major arteries of the Hauppauge area, which he has been instrumental in developing by rerouting traffic through neighborhoods); an increase in traffic fatalities; decreasing air and water quality; an unresolved waste removal crisis, particularly in overdeveloped areas; inflation of land values and the corresponding increase in the cost of houses; a labor shortage and, recently, an enormous increase in taxes -again, particularly in overdeveloped areas. Anyone who has lived on Long Island most of his or her life recognizes the sacrifices we must make in the name of ''development.'' We Long Islanders must think of ourselves as a region with a distinct geographic, ecological and cultural basis, not simply as a market ripe for commercial exploitation, if we are to pass on to future generations a decent environment and a sense of place that transcends material values. Mega-developers, like Mr. Kulka, always argue that without their projects we will lose our tax base and our jobs. Similar arguments have been used by strip-mine operators in Kentucky, by pro-apartheid advocates in South Africa afraid of divestiture, and wherever wealthy land-owning people are able to control the destiny of people they think are dependent upon them. Sooner or later Long Islanders will have to free themselves from this false notion of dependency. To do so now will save our lands, our water supply, our natural resources from further destruction; to do so later can only perpetuate an ever-spiraling cycle of ''growth'' and recession that depletes our God-given resources while adding to, not easing, our tax burden. Jack Kulka said, ''Intelligent people do not take vast areas of land and classify them as environmentally sensitive.'' Why not? After all, it is such vast areas of land that form the basis of our national park and forest system, which is considered the best in the world. Intelligent people had the foresight to set aside vast areas of environmentally sensitive land decades ago; and if intelligent, not selfish or greedy people, are allowed to do the right thing today, they will continue to set aside vast tracts of land here and elsewhere for future generations. HARRY KATZ Wading River The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer's name, address and daytime telephone number. Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Long Island Weekly Section, The New York Times, 229 W. 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.
